c h a p t e r

2

Adaptations to the Physical Environment:
Water and Nutrients

Sperm whales routinely dive to depths of 500 meters, staying below the surface for

more than an hour searching for fish, squid, and other food items that are found at
these depths. Like all mammals, sperm whales breathe air to obtain oxygen. While
diving, however, a sperm whale has to rely on oxygen stored in its body. It might surprise
you to learn that very little of this oxygen resides in the lungs. Most of it is bound to hemo-
globin in the blood or to a similar oxygen storage molecule, myoglobin, in the muscles.
While under water, deep-diving mammals slow down their metabolism considerably by
reducing blood flow to nonvital organs, such as the skin, viscera, lungs, kidneys, and
muscles (which have their own oxygen supply bound to myoglobin); blood flow is main-
tained primarily to the brain and heart. Consequently, the temperature of all but a few
key organs drops, the heart rate slows, and demand for oxygen drops to a minimum.

If having enough oxygen is one challenge faced by deep-diving mammals, another is
keeping warm. Most deep-diving mammals living in cold waters, including the Weddell
seal, a native of Antarctic waters (Figure 2.1), are well insulated by a thick layer of fat
under the skin, which slows the conduction of heat generated by its internal organs to
the surrounding water. Unlike mammals, diving birds, such as the Adélie penguin, are
insulated  against  the  cold  by  air  trapped  in  their  plumage.  Although  air  makes  great
insulation, it creates a problem for diving animals because it increases buoyancy. Imag-
ine trying to dive under water wearing a life jacket! Indeed, a penguin expends most of
its energy during a dive overcoming its positive buoyancy. The air trapped in its plumage
also enlarges a penguin’s waistline and therefore increases the drag of the water on its
body. As the penguin dives deeper, however, the pressure of the water compresses the
air in the plumage. As its volume decreases, buoyancy and drag also decrease, until

23

24

Chapter 2

(a)

(b)

Figure 2.1  The Weddell seal and the Adélie penguin are
excellent divers. (a) the Weddell seal (Leptonychotes weddellii),
though clumsy on land, can dive to over 500 meters depth and
remain submerged for up to an hour and 20 minutes. (b) the

adélie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae) must overcome the buoyancy
of its plumage to descend, but that buoyancy also allows it to
ascend rapidly. photo (a) by r. e. ricklefs; photo (b) by roland
Seitre/peter arnold.

at 60 meters depth (where the pressure is 6 times that at
the surface), the penguin has the same density as seawa-
ter and is neutrally buoyant. At the end of a dive, as the
penguin  swims  upward,  the  air  trapped  in  the  plumage
expands, and its positive buoyancy now propels the pen-
guin toward the surface, fast enough that it can jump onto
an ice floe a meter or more above the surface.

These  aerobic  and  hydrodynamic  limits  confronting
diving mammals and birds illustrate some of the ways in

which organisms are restricted by their physical environ-
ments. In this chapter, we shall explore ways in which the
properties  of  water  both  support  and  constrain  aquatic
and  terrestrial  plants and  animals. These  properties also
direct the evolution of adaptations. The tendency of organ-
isms to adapt to their environments helps us to understand
why  they  are  found  under  the  conditions  to  which  they
are  best  suited.  After  all,  whales  are  pretty  helpless  out
of water!

ch a p t e r  co n c e p t s

•   Water has many properties favorable to life

•   Salt balance and water balance go hand in hand

•   Many inorganic nutrients are dissolved in water

•   Animals must excrete excess nitrogen without losing too

•   Plants obtain water and nutrients from the soil by the

osmotic potential of their root cells

•   Forces generated by transpiration help to move water from

roots to leaves

much water

We  often  speak  of  the  living  and  the  nonliving  as

opposites.  But  although  we  can  easily  distinguish
the  two,  life  does  not  exist  in  isolation  from  its  abiotic
environment. Life depends on the physical world. Water
is the basic medium of life, and energy powers life pro-
cesses. Indeed, living organisms themselves are physical as
well as biological systems.

Organisms, in turn, affect the physical world: soils, the
atmosphere,  lakes  and  oceans,  and  many  sedimentary
rocks owe their properties in part to the activities of organ-
isms.  Many  conditions  favorable  for  the  development
and maintenance of life depend on the activities of living

organisms.  The  oxygen  in  the  atmosphere,  for  example,
owes its existence to photosynthetic microorganisms early
in  the  history  of  life  and,  later,  to  plants.  Today,  for  the
first time in the earth’s history, a single species is capable
of significantly changing the physical world within the life-
time of a single individual. This sobering realization that
we humans have an overriding global impact emphasizes
the close relationship between the physical and biological
dominions.

Although they are distinct from purely abiotic systems,
organisms nonetheless function within limits set by physi-
cal laws. The physical world provides the context for life,

adaptations to the physical environment: Water and Nutrients

25

but also constrains its expression. Life exists out of equilib-
rium with the physical world. Biological systems must use
energy  to  counteract  the  physical  forces  of  gravity,  heat
flow, diffusion, and chemical reaction.

The most important distinction between biological and
abiotic systems is that living organisms have a purposeful
existence.  Their  structures,  physiological  processes,  and
behaviors,  shaped  by  evolutionary  responses  to  natu-
ral  selection,  are  directed  toward  procuring  energy  and
resources  that  are  ultimately  used  to  produce  offspring.
Certainly life is constrained by physics and chemistry, just
as architecture is constrained by the properties of building
materials. However, as in biological systems, the purpose
of the design of a building is unrelated to, and transcends,
the qualities of bricks and mortar.

In the final analysis, life is a unique part of the physi-
cal world, but it exists in a state of constant tension with
its  physical  surroundings.  Organisms  ultimately  receive
their  energy  from  sunlight  and  their  nutrients  from  soil
and water, and they must tolerate extremes of tempera-
ture,  moisture,  salinity,  and  the  other  physical  factors  of
their surroundings. In this chapter and the next, we shall
explore some of the attributes of the physical environment
that are most consequential for life. Because life processes
take place in an aqueous environment, and because water
makes  up  the  largest  proportion  of  all  organisms,  water
seems a logical place to start.

Water has many properties
favorable to life

Water is abundant over most of the earth’s surface, and
within the temperature range usually encountered there,
it is liquid. Because water also has an immense capacity to
dissolve inorganic compounds, it is an excellent medium
for the chemical processes of living systems. It is hard to
imagine life having any other basis than water. No other
common  substance  is  liquid  under  most  conditions  at
the  earth’s  surface.  Organisms  can  move  only  because
the aqueous substrate of life is fluid. Gases are also fluid,
but the higher density of water is needed to achieve the
concentrations of molecules necessary for rapid chemical
reactions. Try to imagine life based on a rigid solid or a
thin gas.

The thermal properties of water

Water  stays  liquid  over  a  broad  range  of  temperatures
because  it  resists  changes  in  temperature.  The  tempera-
ture of water remains steady even when heat is removed

Figure 2.2  Water expands and becomes less dense as
it freezes. Because the density of ice is 0.92 g per cm3 (just
slightly less than that of liquid water, which is 1 g per cm3), this
antarctic iceberg floats, but more than 90% of its bulk lies below
the sea surface. photo by r. e. ricklefs.

or  added  rapidly,  as  can  happen  at  the  air–water  inter-
face or at an organism’s surface. Water also resists changes
between its solid (ice), liquid, and gaseous (water vapor)
states.  Over  500  times  as  much  energy  must  be  added
to evaporate a quantity of water as to raise its tempera-
ture  by  1°C!  Freezing  requires  the  removal  of  80  times
as much heat as is needed to lower the temperature of
the same quantity of water by 1°C. This property helps
to keep large bodies of water from freezing solid during
winter. In addition, water conducts heat rapidly, so ther-
mal energy tends to spread evenly throughout a body of
water, further slowing local changes in temperature.

Another  curious,  but  fortunate,  thermal  property  of
water is that, whereas most substances become denser at
colder temperatures, water becomes less dense as it cools
below 4°C. Moreover, upon freezing, water expands far-
ther  and  becomes  even  less  dense.  Consequently,  ice
floats  (Figure  2.2).  This  property  of  water  prevents  the
bottoms  of  lakes  and  oceans  from  freezing  and  enables
aquatic plants and animals to find refuge there in winter.

The density and viscosity of water

Because water is dense (800 times denser than air), it pro-
vides  support  for  organisms,  which,  after  all,  are  them-
selves  mostly  water.  But  water  is  also  viscous,  meaning
that  it  resists  flow  or  the  movement  of  a  body  through
it.  These  physical  properties  of  water  create  a  favorable
environment for life, but at the same time place limits on
its form and function.

Organisms often deal with such limits by taking advan-
tage of the physical properties of natural substances or by
exploiting  physical  principles.  For  example,  animals  and
plants contain bone, proteins, and other materials that are

26

Chapter 2

Figure 2.3  The droplets of oil in these algal cells provide
buoyancy. photo by Larry Jon Friesen/Saturdaze.

Figure 2.4  Streamlined shapes reduce the drag of water.
the sleek bodies of barracudas (Sphyraena) allow them to swim
rapidly through water with a relatively low expenditure of energy.
photo by Larry Jon Friesen/Saturdaze.

denser than salt water and much denser than fresh water.
These  materials  would  cause  aquatic  organisms  to  sink,
were it not for a variety of adaptations that reduce their
density or retard their rate of sinking. Many fish species
have a gas-filled swim bladder whose size can be adjusted
to make the density of the fish’s body equal to that of the
surrounding water. Some large kelps have gas-filled bulbs
that  float  their  leaves  to  the  sunlit  surface  waters  (see
Figure 1.16). At the other end of the size spectrum, many
of  the  microscopic  unicellular  algae  that  float  in  great
numbers  in  the  surface  waters  of  lakes  and  oceans  use
droplets of oil as flotation devices. With 90%–93% of the
density of pure water, these droplets compensate for the
natural tendency of the algal cells to sink (Figure 2.3).

The high viscosity of water hampers movement, so it is
no surprise that fast-moving aquatic animals have evolved

Figure 2.5  Appendages prevent small aquatic animals
from sinking. these long, filamentous and feathery projections
from the body of a tropical marine planktonic crustacean retard
sinking. photo by Image Quest 3-D.

streamlined shapes, which reduce the drag encountered
in moving through a dense and viscous medium (Figure 2.4).
As animals become smaller, the momentum of their move-
ment  decreases  relative  to  the  viscosity  of  water.  A  tiny
water flea, viewed from a human perspective, seems to be
swimming in molasses. But what impedes swimming also
prevents sinking. Many tiny marine animals have evolved
long, filamentous appendages that take advantage of the
viscosity of water to retard sinking (Figure 2.5), just as a
parachute slows the fall of a body through air.

Many inorganic nutrients are
dissolved in water

Organisms require a variety of chemical elements to build
necessary biological structures and maintain life processes
(Table 2.1). The elements they require in the greatest quan-
tities are hydrogen, carbon, and oxygen, which are the ele-
ments  in  carbohydrates.  Organisms  also  require  varying
quantities of nitrogen, phosphorus, sulfur, potassium, cal-
cium, magnesium, and iron. Certain organisms need other
elements in abundance as well. For example, diatoms con-
struct their glassy shells from silicates (Figure 2.6); tunicates,
which are sessile marine invertebrates, accumulate vana-
dium in high concentrations, possibly as a defense against
predators;  nitrogen-fixing  bacteria  require  molybdenum
as  a  part  of  the  enzyme  they  use  to  assimilate  nitrogen
from  the  atmosphere.  Animals  ultimately  acquire  these
nutrients  from  plants,  and  plants  acquire  most  of  them
from water.

adaptations to the physical environment: Water and Nutrients

27

 TAble 2.1  Major nutrients required by organisms, and some of their primary functions

Element

Nitrogen (N)
Phosphorus (P)
Sulfur (S)
Potassium (K)
Calcium (Ca)

Magnesium (Mg)
Iron (Fe)
Sodium (Na)

Function

Structural component of proteins and nucleic acids
Structural component of nucleic acids, phospholipids, and bone
Structural component of many proteins
Major solute in animal cells
 Structural component of bone and of material between woody plant cells; regulator of
  cell permeability
Structural component of chlorophyll; involved in the function of many enzymes
Structural component of hemoglobin and many enzymes
Major solute in extracellular fluids of animals

(a)

(b)

30 m

5 m

Figure 2.6  Diatoms use silicates to build their shells. the
glassy outer shells of these photosynthetic protists take diverse
forms, as shown by these scanning election micrographs of
(a) Entogonia and (b) Cyclotella. photo (a) by F. rossi; photo (b) by
ann Smith/photo researchers.

The solvent capacity of water

Water has an impressive capacity to dissolve various sub-
stances, making them accessible to living systems and pro-
viding a medium within which they can react to form new
compounds.  Water  is  a  powerful  solvent  because  water
molecules  are  strongly  attracted  to  many  solids.  Some
solid compounds consist of electrically charged atoms or
groups of atoms called ions. For example, common table
salt, sodium chloride (NaCl), contains positively charged
sodium ions (Na1) and negatively charged chloride ions
(Cl2).  In  its  solid  state,  these  ions  are  arranged  in  close
proximity in a crystal lattice. In water, however, the crystal
lattice  dissolves.  The  charged  sodium  and  chloride  ions
are powerfully attracted by water molecules, which them-

selves  have  both  positive  and  negative  charges.  In  fact,
these forces of attraction are stronger than the forces that
hold salt crystals together. Therefore, the  crystals readily
separate into their component ions when surrounded by
water  molecules—another  way  of  saying  that  the  salt
dissolves.

The powerful solvent properties of water are respon-
sible for the presence of minerals in streams, rivers, lakes,
and oceans. Water vapor in the atmosphere condenses to
form clouds and, eventually, precipitation (rain and snow).
When it condenses, the water is nearly pure, except for
dissolved  atmospheric  gases  (principally  nitrogen,  oxy-
gen, and carbon dioxide). Rainwater acquires some min-
erals  from  dust  particles  and  droplets  of  ocean  spray  in
the atmosphere as it falls. As it flows over and under the
ground toward the ocean, it picks up additional minerals
from rocks and soils. So-called “hard” water has high con-
centrations of dissolved calcium. The water in most lakes
and rivers contains 0.01%–0.02% dissolved minerals, far
less than the average concentration of the ocean (3.4% by
weight), in which salts and other minerals have accumu-
lated over several billion years.

The  ocean  functions  like  a  large  still,  concentrating
ions  as  mineral-laden  water  arrives  via  streams  and  riv-
ers  and  as  pure  water  evaporates  from  its  surface.  Here
the concentrations of some elements, particularly calcium,
reach  limits  set  by  the  maximum  solubility  of  the  com-
pounds  they  form.  In  the  oceans,  calcium  ions  (Ca21)
readily  combine  with  dissolved  carbon  dioxide  to  form
calcium  carbonate,  which  is  soluble  only  to  the  extent
of  0.014  grams  per  liter  (g  per  L)  of  water,  or  0.0014%
by  weight.  Its  concentration  in  the  oceans  reached  this
level eons ago, so the excess calcium carbonate formed
from  calcium  ions  washing  into  the  oceans  each  year

28

Chapter 2

Figure 2.7  limestone is made
of calcium carbonate. the limestone
sediments that form many mountains
represent calcium carbonate precipitated
out of solution in shallow seas. photo by Larry
Jon Friesen/Saturdaze.

precipitates to form limestone sediments (Figure 2.7). This
reaction serves as an important sink for carbon dioxide. At
the other extreme, the solubility of sodium compounds,
such as sodium chloride (360 g per L) and sodium bicar-
bonate  (69  g  per  L),  far  exceeds  the  concentration  of
sodium in seawater (approximately 10 g per L at present).
Most  of  the  sodium  chloride  washing  into  ocean  basins
remains dissolved, so the concentration of this compound
in seawater has continued to increase over geologic time.

weak acids, such as carbonic acid (H2CO3), formed when
atmospheric CO2 dissolves in water. These waters tend to
have pH values close to neutral. Some natural waters are
somewhat basic, or alkaline (pH  7), having an excess of
OH2 over H1. The normal range of pH in natural waters
is between 6 and 9, although small ponds and streams in
regions with acid rainfall, or which are polluted by sulfuric
acid  draining  out  of  coal  mining  wastes,  can  reach  pH
values as low as 4.

Hydrogen ions in ecological systems

Among dissolved substances in water, hydrogen ions (H1)
deserve special mention because they are extremely reac-
tive.  At  high  concentrations,  they  affect  the  activities  of
most enzymes and have other, generally negative conse-
quences for life processes. They also play a crucial role in
dissolving minerals from rocks and soils.

The  concentration  of  hydrogen  ions  in  a  solution  is
referred to as its acidity. The acidity is commonly mea-
sured as pH, which is the negative of the common loga-
rithm of hydrogen ion concentration, measured in moles
per liter (Figure 2.8). In pure water at any given time, a
small fraction of the water molecules (H2O) are dissoci-
ated into their hydrogen (H1) and hydroxide (OH2) ions.
The pH of pure water, which is defined as neutral pH, is
7, which means that the concentration of hydrogen ions
is 1027 (0.0000001) moles per liter, or one ten-millionth
of a gram per kilogram of water. In contrast, strong acids,
such as sulfuric acid (H2SO4) and hydrochloric acid (HCl),
dissociate  almost  completely  when  dissolved  in  water.
At high concentrations, these acids can produce pH val-
ues  approaching  0,  which  is  1  mole  (the  equivalent  of
1 gram) of H1 per liter. The acid in your stomach has a
pH of 1 (0.1 mole per liter). Most natural waters contain

pH
value
0

H+ ion concentration
(moles per liter)
1

Stomach acid

Carbonated beverages

Acid rain

Neutral Most streams and rivers

Human blood

Oceans

Alkaline lake

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Acidic

Basic

10

11

12

13

14

10–1

10–2

10–3

10–4

10–5

10–6

10–7

10–8

10–9

10–10

10–11

10–12

10–13

10–14

Figure 2.8  The pH scale of hydrogen ion concentration
extends from 0 (highly acidic) to 14 (highly alkaline).

adaptations to the physical environment: Water and Nutrients

29

Hydrogen  ions,  because  of  their  high  reactivity,  dis-
solve minerals from rocks and soils, enhancing the natural
solvent properties of water. For example, in the presence
of hydrogen ions, the calcium carbonate in limestone dis-
solves readily, according to the chemical equation

H1 1 CaCO3 → Ca21 1 HCO3

2

Calcium  ions  are  important  to  life  processes,  and  their
presence at high concentrations is vital to organisms, such
as  snails,  that  form  shells  made  of  calcium  carbonate.
Indeed, mollusks are less abundant and diverse in streams
and lakes that are nutrient poor. Thus, hydrogen ions are
essential for making certain nutrients available for life pro-
cesses.  However,  this  same  reactivity  of  hydrogen  ions
helps to dissolve highly toxic heavy metals, such as arse-
nic, cadmium, and mercury. When made soluble in natu-
ral waters, these metals are detrimental to life processes.

Plants obtain water and nutrients from
the soil by the osmotic potential of
their root cells

2), phosphorus as phosphate ions (PO4

Plants acquire the inorganic nutrients they need—other
than  oxygen,  carbon,  and  some  nitrogen—as  ions  dis-
solved  in  water  in  the  soil  around  their  roots.  Nitrogen
1)  and  nitrate  ions
exists  in  soil  as  ammonium  (NH4
32), calcium
(NO3
and  potassium  as  their  elemental  ions  Ca21  and  K1,
respectively. The availability of these and other inorganic
nutrients varies with their chemical form in the soil and
with temperature, acidity, and the presence of other ions.
The scarcity (relative to need) of inorganic nutrients often
limits plant growth. Phosphorus, in particular, often limits
plant production in terrestrial environments; even when
phosphorus is abundant, most of the compounds it forms
in soil do not dissolve easily. We shall have much more to
say about nutrient uptake by plants in later chapters.

Soil structure and water-holding
capacity

Most  terrestrial  plants  obtain  the  water  they  need  from
the  soil.  The  amount  of  water  in  soil  and  its  availability
to  plants  varies  with  the  physical  structure  of  the  soil.
Because of their electrical charges, water molecules cling
to one another by hydrogen bonding (the basis for surface
tension) and to the surfaces of soil particles (a tendency

known as capillary attraction). This clinginess is the reason
why  soil  is  able  to  retain  water.  The  more  surface  area
a  soil  has  per  unit  of  volume,  the  more  water  that  soil
can hold.

Soils consist of particles of clay, silt, and sand, as well
as  particles  of  organic  material,  in  varying  proportions.
Clay  particles  are  the  smallest,  at  less  than  0.002  mm
in  diameter;  silt  particles  vary  from  0.002  to  0.05  mm
in  diameter;  and  sand  particles  are  the  largest,  at  more
than 0.05 mm. Because the total surface area of particles
in  a  given  volume  of  soil  increases  as  particle  size  de-
creases, soils with abundant clay and silt hold more water
than  coarse  sands,  through  which  water  drains  quickly
(Figure  2.9).  However,  because  clay  particles  are  small
and hold water tightly, less water is available to plants in a
clay soil than in a soil with a mixture of particles of differ-
ent sizes, commonly called a loam.

Plant roots easily take up water that clings loosely to
soil  particles.  But  close  to  the  surfaces  of  soil  particles,
water adheres tightly by more powerful forces of attrac-
tion. The strength of the attractive forces holding water in
the soil is called the water potential of the soil. Most
of  this  water  potential  is  generated  by  the  attraction  of
water to the surfaces of soil particles—the soil matrix—
so it is often referred to as the matric potential. As we
shall see below, plants must also overcome the pull of the
earth’s gravity and the diffusion of water from the roots
into the soil due to the presence of dissolved substances
in soil water.

By convention, pure water is defined as having a water
potential  of  0.  Water  always  moves  from  a  higher  to  a
lower water potential. Soil has a negative water potential
because  soil  attracts  water  from  a  pure  solution  with  a

Coarse sand

Silt

Water drains quickly
through coarse sand.

Soils with more clay and
silt hold more water.

Figure 2.9  Soils with smaller particles hold more water.
Soils with large particles have large spaces between them that
are not completely filled with water at field capacity. Soils with
very small particles hold more water, but they hold it so tightly
that its availability to plants is reduced.

30

Chapter 2

water potential of 0. Consequently, plants must develop a
water potential lower than that of the soil to overcome the
matric potential and extract water. Soil scientists quantify
water  potential  in  units  of  pressure,  called  megapascals
(MPa). For reference, the standard atmospheric pressure
at the surface of the earth is approximately one-tenth of a
megapascal (0.1 MPa).

Matric potential is greatest right at the surfaces of soil
particles  and  decreases  with  distance  from  them.  Water
held by a matric potential of less than about 20.01 MPa
drains out of the soil under the pull of gravity and joins the
groundwater in the crevices of the bedrock below. Water
drains through the interstices between large soil particles
as  long  as  it  is  more  than  about  0.005  mm  (five  thou-
sandths of a millimeter!) from their surfaces. The amount
of water held against gravity by a matric potential of less
than 20.01 MPa is called the field capacity of the soil.
The  field  capacity  represents  the  maximum  amount  of
water available to a plant in well-drained soil. How much
water is this? Imagine a particle of silt with a diameter of
0.01 mm enlarged to the size of this page (25,000). The
film of water held at field capacity would be as thick as
half the width of the page. The volume of water in soil
at  field  capacity  varies  from  about  10%  of  the  total  soil
volume for sandy soils to 50% for soils dominated by fine
clay particles.

As soils dry out, the remaining water is held ever more
tightly because a greater proportion of that water lies close

to the surfaces of soil particles. Soils with water potentials
as  low  as  210  MPa  are  very  dry.  Most  crop  plants  can
extract  water  from  soils  with  water  potentials  down  to
about 21.5 MPa. At lower water potentials, these plants
wilt,  even  though  some  water  still  remains  in  the  soil.
Agronomists and ecologists refer to a water potential of
21.5 MPa as the wilting coefficient or wilting point
of the soil. This is only a general rule of thumb, however,
because many drought-adapted species can extract water
from even drier soils.

Osmotic potential and water
uptake by plants

Water in the environment, and in organisms, contains dis-
solved  substances,  called  solutes,  which  influence  the
diffusion  of  water  molecules.  Plants  take  advantage  of
the tendency of water to move from regions of low sol-
ute concentration to regions of high solute concentration
(Figure 2.10). When the fluid in a cell has a high concen-
tration  of  ions  and  other  solutes  (and  thus  a  low  water
potential),  water  tends  to  move  from  the  surrounding
environment into the cell. This process is called osmosis.
The force with which an aqueous solution attracts water
by osmosis is known as its osmotic potential. Like the
matric potential of soil, osmotic potential is expressed in
units of pressure. It is the osmotic potential in the roots
of trees that causes water to enter the roots from the soil

(a)

(b)

Because the solutes are at high
concentration, water tends to
move across the membrane into
the inverted funnel.

Eventually, the osmotic pressure of
the fluid, which decreases as the solutes
become more diluted, is balanced by
the gravitational pressure exerted by
the fluid in the stem.

Within the funnel,
the increasing volume
pushes fluid up the stem.

Pull of
gravity

Figure 2.10  Solutes enclosed within
a membrane that is permeable to water
create an osmotic potential. plant roots use
this principle to draw water from the soil and
to develop sufficient osmotic pressure to push
water up into the stem.

Water

Water

Osmotic
pressure

Osmotic
pressure

adaptations to the physical environment: Water and Nutrients

31

against the attraction of soil particles and the downward
pull of gravity.

A complicating factor is that ions and other solutes dif-
fuse through water from regions of high solute concentra-
tion to regions of low solute concentration. So, as water is
coming into the cell, solutes tend to move out. Eventually,
solute concentrations within the cell and in the surround-
ing water would come into equilibrium. At this point, the
osmotic potentials of the cell and its surroundings would
be equal, and there would be no net movement of water
across the cell membrane. Cells prevent this equalization
of osmotic potential in two ways. First, a cell membrane
can be semipermeable, meaning that some small mol-
ecules and ions can diffuse across it, but larger ones can-
not. Many carbohydrates and most proteins are too large
to  pass  through  the  pores  of  a  cell  membrane,  so  they
remain inside the cell and help to maintain its low water
potential. Second, cell membranes can transport ions and
small  molecules  actively  against  a  concentration  gradi-
ent to maintain their concentrations within the cell. This
active transport requires expenditure of energy.

The osmotic potential generated by an aqueous solu-
tion depends on its solute concentration. More specifically,
it depends on the number of solute molecules or ions per
volume  of  solution.  Thus,  a  given  mass  of  a  small  solute
molecule generates greater osmotic potential than the same
mass of a larger molecule. You will remember from your
introductory  chemistry  course  that  the  concentration  of
molecules in solution is expressed in terms of gram molec-
ular  weights,  or  moles,  per  liter.  For  example,  the  sugar
glucose (C6H12O6) has a molecular weight of 180, and so a
1 molar solution contains 180 grams of glucose per liter of
water. The amino acid alanine (C3H7NO2) has a molecular
weight of 89, and so the same mass of that substance per
liter of water would contain twice as many molecules and
have twice the osmotic potential of glucose.

Plants growing in deserts and salty environments can
lower  the  water  potential  of  their  roots  to  as  much  as
26 MPa, thereby overcoming soil water potentials down
to  26  MPa,  by  increasing  the  concentrations  of  amino
acids,  carbohydrates,  or  organic  acids  in  their  root  cells.
They  pay  a  high  metabolic  price,  however,  to  maintain
high concentrations of dissolved substances.

Forces generated by transpiration help
to move water from roots to leaves

Osmotic potential draws water from the soil into the cells
of plant roots. But how does that water get from the roots
to the leaves? Plants conduct water to their leaves through

xylem elements, which are the empty remains of xylem
cells in the cores of roots and stems, connected end-to-end
to form the equivalent of water pipes. Osmotic potential
in  the  roots,  which  draws  water  from  the  soil  into  the
plant, creates a root pressure that forces water into the
xylem  elements.  However,  this  pressure  is  counteracted
by  gravity  and  the  osmotic  potential  of  living  root  cells,
and under the best circumstances it can raise water to a
height of no more than about 20 meters, far short of the
leaves of the tallest trees.

Leaves  themselves  generate  water  potential  when
water evaporates from leaf cell surfaces into the air spaces
within  the  leaves,  a  process  known  as  transpiration.
The  column  of  water  in  a  xylem  element  is  continuous
from the roots to the leaves, since it is held together by
hydrogen bonds between the water molecules. Thus, low
water potentials in leaves can literally draw water upward
through  the  xylem  elements  against  the  osmotic  poten-
tial of the living root cells and the pull of gravity. Dry air
at 20°C has a water potential of 2133 MPa. The water
potential in the air spaces within leaves is never this low
because  of  retained  water  vapor,  but  it  is  low  enough
under  most  conditions  to  pull  water  through  the  roots,
xylem, and leaves. Thus, transpiration creates a continu-
ous gradient of water potential as high as 22 to 25 MPa
from leaf surfaces in contact with the atmosphere to the
surfaces of root hairs in contact with soil water. This expla-
nation of the mechanism of water movement from roots
to  leaves  is  known  as  the  cohesion–tension  theory
(Figure 2.11).

Although  transpiration  generates  a  powerful  force,
when the soil reaches the wilting point, water  lost  from
the leaves of a plant can no longer be replaced by new
water moving up from the roots. To prevent further water
loss from the leaves, plants have various mechanisms for
controlling transpiration. Most of the cells on the exterior
of a leaf are coated with a waxy cuticle that retards water
loss. Gas exchange between the atmosphere and the inte-
rior of the leaf occurs through small openings at the leaf
surfaces, called stomates (Figure 2.12). (Many botanists
prefer the term stomata, singular stoma, from the Latin
for  “mouth.”)  The  stomates  are  the  points  of  entry  for
CO2 and the exits for water escaping to the atmosphere
by transpiration. Plants can reduce water loss by closing
their stomates. As leaf water potential decreases, the so-
called  guard  cells  bordering  a  stomate  collapse  slightly,
which  causes  them  to  press  together  and  shut  off  the
opening. Closing of the stomates prevents further water
from  escaping,  but  it  also  prevents  the  carbon  dioxide
required for photosynthesis from entering the leaf. Such
compromises are simply a fact of life.

32

Chapter 2

Figure 2.11  The cohesion–tension
theory explains the movement of water
from the roots to the leaves of a plant. the
water potential that draws water upward is
generated by transpiration.

Stomate Water vapor

Water

Xylem

Leaf

Stem

Root
hair

Water

Root xylem

Root

1 Water vapor diffuses
out of the stomates.

2 Water evaporates from
    mesophyll cells
    (cut section).

3 Tension pulls the water
column upward and
outward in the xylem
of veins in the leaves…

4 …in the stem…

5 …and in the root.

6 Water molecules form
a cohesive column in
the xylem.

7 Water moves into the
root by osmosis,
and then into xylem.

Stomate

Guard cell

Salt balance and water balance
go hand in hand

To maintain the proper amounts of water and dissolved
substances in their bodies, organisms must balance losses
with  intake.  Often,  organisms  take  in  water  with  a  sol-
ute  concentration  that  differs  from  that  of  their  bodies,
so they must either acquire additional solutes to make up
the deficit or rid themselves of excess solutes. When water
evaporates from the surfaces of terrestrial organisms into
the atmosphere, solutes are left behind, and their concen-
tration in the body tends to increase. Under such circum-
stances, organisms must excrete excess salts to maintain
the  proper  concentrations  in  their  bodies.  Salt  concen-
trations  that  are  too  high  can  change  the  way  proteins
interact  with  other  molecules  and  disrupt  cell  function.

50 m

Figure 2.12  Plants control water loss by opening and
closing stomates on the leaf surface. Courtesy of Michele
McCauley, from p. h. raven, r. F. evert, and S. e. eichorn, Biology of

Plants, 6th ed., W. h. Freeman and Company and Worth publishers,

New York (1999), p. 630.

adaptations to the physical environment: Water and Nutrients

33

Because solutes determine the osmotic potential of body
fluids, the mechanisms that organisms use to maintain a
proper salt balance are referred to as osmoregulation.

(a)

Management of salt balance by plants

Terrestrial  plants  transpire  hundreds  of  grams  of  water
for  every  gram  of  dry  matter  they  accumulate  in  tissue
growth, and they inevitably take up dissolved salts along
with  the  water  that  passes  into  their  roots.  Where  salt
concentrations in soil water are high, plants pump excess
salts back into the soil by active transport across their root
surfaces, which therefore function as the plant’s “kidneys.”
Mangroves are plants that grow on coastal mudflats that
are inundated daily by high tides (Figure 2.13). Not only
does  this  habitat  impose  a  high  salt  load,  but  the  high
osmotic potential of the saltwater environment also makes
it difficult for the roots to take up water. To counter these
problems, many mangroves maintain high concentrations
of organic solutes—various amino acids and small sugar
molecules—in  their  roots  and  leaves  to  increase  their
osmotic  potential.  In  addition,  salt  glands  in  the  leaves
secrete  salt  by  active  transport  to  the  exterior  leaf  sur-
face. Many mangrove species also exclude salts from their
roots  by  active  transport.  Because  many  of  these  adap-
tations  parallel  those  of  plants  from  environments  with
scarce water, the mangrove habitat can be thought of as
an osmotic desert, even though plant roots are frequently
immersed in water.

Water balance and salt balance in
terrestrial animals

(b)

Water is as important to animals as it is to plants. Terres-
trial animals, with their internalized gas exchange surfaces,
are  less  vulnerable  to  respiratory  water  loss  than  plants
are,  and  because  they  are  not  immersed  continuously
in  water  like  aquatic  organisms,  they  have  little  trouble
retaining ions. They acquire the mineral ions they need in
the water they drink and the food they eat, and they use
water to eliminate excess salts in their urine. Where fresh
water abounds, animals can drink large quantities of water
to flush out salts that would otherwise accumulate in the
body. Where water is scarce, however, animals must pro-
duce concentrated urine to conserve water.

As  one  would  expect,  desert  animals  have  cham-
pion kidneys. For example, whereas human kidneys can
concentrate most solutes in their urine to about 4 times
the  levels  in  their  blood  plasma,  the  kangaroo  rat’s  kid-
neys produce urine with solute concentrations as high as
14 times the levels in its blood. However, because sodium

Figure 2.13  Mangroves have adaptations for coping with
a high salt load. (a) the roots of mangroves are immersed in
salt water at high tide. (b) Specialized glands in the leaves of
the button mangrove (Conocarpus erecta) excrete salt, which
precipitates on their outer surfaces. photos by r. e. ricklefs.

34

Chapter 2

and chloride ions participate in the mechanism by which
the  animal  kidney  retains  water,  the  kidney  does  not
excrete these ions efficiently. Hence, many animals lack-
ing  access  to  fresh  water  have  specialized  salt-secreting
organs that work on a different principle than the kidney,
more  like  the  salt  glands  of  mangrove  plants.  The  “salt
glands”  of  birds  and  reptiles,  which  are  particularly  well
developed  in  marine  species,  are  actually  modified  tear
glands located in the orbit of the eye, capable of secreting
a concentrated salt solution.

These adaptations help animals to balance their water
budget on land, but even aquatic animals face challenges
in the management of water.

Water exclusion in freshwater animals

The  water  balance  of  aquatic  animals  is  closely  tied  to
the concentrations of salts and other solutes in their body
tissues and in the environment. The body fluids of verte-
brate animals, which have an osmotic potential of about
20.3  to  20.5  MPa,  occupy  an  intermediate  position
between fresh water (with an osmotic potential close to
zero) and seawater (21.2 MPa). Thus, the tissues of fresh-
water  fish  have  higher  salt  concentrations  than  the  sur-
rounding water. Such organisms, which are referred to as
hyperosmotic, tend to gain water from their surround-
ings and lose solutes.

Freshwater  fish  continuously  gain  water  by  osmo-
sis across the surfaces of the mouth and gills, which are
the  most  permeable  of  their  tissues  that  are  exposed  to
the  freshwater  environment,  as  well  as  in  their  food
(Figure  2.14).  To  counter  this  influx,  the  fish  eliminate
excess water in their urine. If the fish did not also selec-
tively retain solutes, however, they would soon become
lifeless bags of water. The kidneys of freshwater fish retain
salts by actively removing ions from the urine and infusing
them back into the bloodstream. In addition, the gills can
selectively  absorb  ions  from  the  surrounding  water  and
release them into the bloodstream.

Water retention in marine animals

Marine fish are surrounded by water with a salt concentra-
tion higher than that of their bodies; in other words, they
are hypo-osmotic. As a result, they tend to lose water
to the surrounding seawater and must drink seawater to
replace  it  (see  Figure  2.14).  The  salts  that  come  in  with
that  water  and  with  their  food,  as  well  as  the  salts  that
diffuse in across their body surfaces, must be excreted by
the gills and kidneys.

Some  sharks  and  rays  have  found  a  unique  solution
to the problem of water balance. Sharks retain urea—a
common  nitrogenous  by-product  of  protein  metabolism
in  vertebrates—in  the  bloodstream,  instead  of  excret-

Freshwater fish
(hyperosmotic body fluids)

Freshwater fish
(hyperosmotic body fluids)

Marine fish
(hypo-osmotic body fluids)

Marine fish
(hypo-osmotic body fluids)

Marine fish
must drink to
acquire water.

Marine fish
must drink to
acquire water.

Osmotic gain
Osmotic gain
(gills)
(gills)

Osmotic loss
Osmotic loss
(gills)
(gills)

Drinking

Drinking

Urine

Urine

Urine

Urine

Water

Water

Figure 2.14  exchanges of water and
solutes differ between freshwater and
marine fish. the body fluids of freshwater
fish are hyperosmotic (have a higher
salt concentration than the surrounding
water), whereas those of marine fish are
hypo-osmotic. the gills and kidneys of
fish actively exclude or retain solutes to
maintain salt balance. Marine fish must drink
to acquire water. after K. Schmidt-Nielsen,
Animal Physiology: Adaptation and Environment,

Cambridge University press, Cambridge (1975).

Active uptake
Active uptake
(gills)
(gills)

Diffusion (gills)

Diffusion (gills)

Solutes

Solutes

Food

Food

Salts from
seawater

Salts from
seawater

Urine (with most
solutes removed)

Urine (with most
solutes removed)

Na+,Cl–
Na+,Cl–
secretion (gills)
secretion (gills)

2–

Mg2+,SO4
(in urine)

Mg2+,SO4
(in urine)

2–

The gills and kidneys actively
retain solutes to maintain salt
balance.

The gills and kidneys actively
retain solutes to maintain salt
balance.

The gills and kidneys actively
exclude solutes to maintain salt
balance.

The gills and kidneys actively
exclude solutes to maintain salt
balance.

adaptations to the physical environment: Water and Nutrients

35

Urea retained in the
shark‘s blood equalizes its
osmotic potential to that of
seawater.

Other

K+

Na+

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

)
r
e
t
a
w
a
e
s

f
o

l
a
i
t
n
e
t
o
p

e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p

c
i
t
o
m
O

s

s
a
(

Seawater

Marine salmon

Dogfish shark

Figure 2.15  Sharks match their total solute concentration
to that of seawater. Sodium, potassium, urea, and other solutes
(mostly chloride ions) contribute differently to the osmotic potential
of seawater and of the body fluids of marine fish and sharks.
From data in K. Schmidt-Nielsen, Animal Physiology: Adaptation and

Environment, 5th ed., Cambridge University press, London and New York

(1997), table 8.6.

ing  it  from  the  body  in  their  urine  as  other  animals  do.
Concentrations of urea up to 2.5% (compared with less
than 0.03% in other vertebrates) raise the osmotic poten-
tial  of  their  blood  to  the  level  of  seawater  without  any
increase in the concentrations of sodium and chloride ions
(Figure  2.15).  Consequently,  the  movement  of  water
across  a  shark’s  body  surfaces  is  balanced,  with  neither
gain nor loss. This adaptation frees sharks and rays from
having  to  drink  extra  salt-laden  water  to  replace  water
lost by osmosis. The observation that freshwater species
of  rays  do  not  accumulate  urea  in  their  blood  empha-

sizes the importance of urea for osmoregulation in marine
members  of  this  group.  The  downside  of  retaining  urea
is  that  urea  impairs  protein  function.  Sharks  and  many
other  marine  organisms  that  use  urea  to  maintain  their
water  balance  also  accumulate  high  concentrations  of  a
compound  called  trimethylamine  oxide  to  protect  pro-
teins from its negative effects.

ecologiSTS
in THe FielD

Flip-flopping  osmoregulation  in  a
small marine invertebrate. The small
copepod  Tigriopus  is  exposed  to  widely  fluctuating  salt
concentrations over short periods and must adjust its physi-
ology rapidly to compensate for these changes. Tigriopus
lives in splash pools high in the intertidal zone along rocky
coasts (Figure 2.16), which receive seawater infrequently
from the splash of high waves. As the water evaporates,
the  salt  concentration  in  these  pools  rises  to  high  levels.
However, a heavy rainfall can rapidly lower the salt con-
centration,  causing  a  rapid  reversal  of  environmental
conditions.

Ron Burton, at the Scripps Institute of Oceanography,
has shown that Tigriopus, like sharks and rays, manages
its water balance by changing the osmotic potential of its
body fluids. When the salt concentration in a pool is high,
individuals  synthesize  large  quantities  of  certain  amino
acids such as alanine and proline. These small molecules
increase the osmotic potential of the body fluids to match
that of the environment without the deleterious physiologi-
cal consequences of high levels of salts or urea.

This response to excess salts in the environment is costly,
however. In a laboratory experiment, individual Tigriopus
were switched from 50% seawater to 100% seawater to
mimic what might happen when waves at high tide filled
a  pool  previously  flushed  with  rainwater.  In  response  to
this change, the respiration rate of the copepods initially

(a)

(b)

Figure 2.16  The tiny copepod Tigriopus, shown here with an attached egg mass, lives in
splash pools high in the rocky intertidal zone in california. Courtesy of ron Burton (a); r. e. ricklefs (b).

36

Chapter 2

declined, owing to salt stress, and then increased as they
synthesized alanine and proline to restore their water bal-
ance. In a second experiment, the copepods were switched
from 100% seawater to 50%  seawater.  In  this case,  the
copepods’ respiration rate immediately increased as they
rapidly  degraded  and  metabolized  excess  free  amino
acids to reduce their osmotic potential to that of their new
environment.

Certain environments pose special osmotic challenges.
The  salt  concentrations  in  some  water-filled  landlocked
basins greatly exceed those of seawater and even splash
pools, particularly in arid regions where evaporation out-
paces precipitation. The Great Salt Lake in Utah contains
5%–27%  salt—that  is,  up  to  8  times  more  than  normal
seawater—depending  on  the  water  level.  The  osmotic
potential of its water—well in excess of 210 MPa—would
shrivel most organisms. However, a few aquatic creatures,
such  as  brine  shrimp  (Artemia),  thrive  in  the  Great  Salt
Lake, providing an important food resource for birds and
other creatures. Brine shrimp can survive in the Great Salt
Lake because they excrete salt at a prodigious rate, and
at a high energetic cost. They obtain the energy they need
by feeding on the abundant photosynthetic bacteria that
live in their hypersaline environment.

Animals must excrete excess nitrogen
without losing too much water

Most carnivores, whether they eat crustaceans, fish, insects,
or  mammals,  consume  excess  nitrogen.  This  nitrogen  is

part  of  the  proteins  and  nucleic  acids  in  their  diet,  and
it  must  be  eliminated  from  the  body  when  these  com-
pounds  are  metabolized.  Most  aquatic  animals  produce
a  simple  metabolic  by-product  of  nitrogen  metabolism:
ammonia (NH3). Although ammonia is mildly poisonous
to tissues, aquatic animals eliminate it rapidly in copious
dilute urine, or directly across the body surface, before it
reaches a dangerous concentration within the body.

Terrestrial animals cannot use large quantities of water
to  excrete  excess  nitrogen.  Instead,  they  produce  meta-
bolic  by-products  that  are  less  toxic  than  ammonia  and
which  can  therefore  accumulate  to  higher  levels  in  the
blood and urine without danger. In mammals, this meta-
bolic by-product is urea [CO(NH2)2], the same substance
that sharks produce and retain to achieve osmotic balance
in marine environments. Because urea dissolves in water,
excreting it still requires some urinary water loss—how
much  depends  on  the  concentrating  power  of  the  kid-
neys. Birds and reptiles have carried adaptation to terres-
trial life one step further: they excrete nitrogen in the form
of uric acid (C5H4N4O3), which crystallizes out of solution
and can then be excreted as a highly concentrated paste
in the urine.

Although  excreting  urea  and  uric  acid  conserves
water, it is costly in terms of the energy lost in the organic
carbon used to form these compounds. For each atom of
nitrogen excreted, 0.5 and 1.25 atoms of organic carbon
are lost in urea and uric acid, respectively. None are lost
in the excretion of ammonia.

S u m mAr y

1.  Water is the basic medium of life. It is abundant over
most of the earth’s surface, it is liquid within the range of
temperatures usually encountered there, and it is a pow-
erful solvent. These properties of water make it an ideal
medium for living systems.

2.  Water  conducts  heat  rapidly  and  resists  changes  in
temperature  and  state.  Temperatures  are  therefore  rela-
tively evenly distributed throughout bodies of water.

3.  Water is denser, and provides more buoyancy, than
air,  but  it  is  also  more  viscous  and  therefore  impedes
movement.

natural waters have pH values between 6 (slightly acidic)
and 9 (slightly alkaline).

6.  Because water clings tightly to the surfaces of soil par-
ticles, its availability depends in part on the physical struc-
ture  of  soil.  Soils  containing  a  high  proportion  of  small
clay particles hold water more tightly than do sandy soils.
The  force  by  which  soil  holds  water  is  called  the  water
potential  of  the  soil.  Most  plants  cannot  remove  water
from soils with a water potential more negative than 21.5
megapascals (MPa). This water potential is referred to as
the wilting point of the soil.

4.  All natural waters contain dissolved substances picked
up  in  the  atmosphere  or  from  soils  and  rocks  through
which water flows.

7.  Plants  extract  water  from  soils  by  maintaining  high
solute concentrations in their root cells to generate high
osmotic potentials.

5.  The concentration of hydrogen (H1) ions in a solu-
tion is referred to as acidity and is expressed as pH. Most

8.  According  to  the  cohesion–tension  theory,  water  is
drawn from the roots to the leaves of a plant by a gradi-

