s    Protozoans    Other invertebrates    Other arthropods

e
t
a
d
r
o
h
C

Insects

The majority of animal species is composed of insects.

 C H A P T E R

 21

 Hexapods

(cid:127)
(cid:127)

     PHYLUM ARTHROPODA
 SUBPHYLUM HEXAPODA

Hexapoda

Arthropoda

  A Winning Combination
  Humans suffer staggering economic losses to insects. Locust out-
breaks in Africa seem a thing of the past to many today, but this is
far from true. Locust populations ﬂ uctuate between quiet phases,
where they cover only 16 million square kilometers in 30 African
countries, and plague phases, where they cover 29 million square
kilometers of land in 60 countries. A swarm of locusts. Schistocerca
gregaria, contains 40 to 80 million insects per square kilometer. In
peak phases, they cover 20% of the earth’s land surface and affect
the livelihood of one-tenth of the earth’s population. The last plague
phase was 1986–1989, but the Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO) of the United Nations monitors and maps population sizes
continuously to respond quickly to outbreaks ( http://www.fao.org/
ag/locusts/en/info/info/faq/index.html ).

 In the western United States and Canada, an outbreak of moun-
tain pine beetles in the 1980s and 1990s killed pines on huge acreages,

and the 1973 to 1985 outbreak of spruce budworm in ﬁ r/spruce forests
killed millions of conifer trees. Since its introduction in the 1920s, a
fungus that causes Dutch elm disease, mainly transmitted by European
bark beetles, has virtually obliterated American elm trees in North
America. Since 2004, another alien invader, the emerald ash borer, a
beetle, threatens the ash trees of North America.

 These examples remind us of our ceaseless struggle with the
dominant group of animals on earth today: insects. Insects far out-
number all other species of animals in the world combined, and
numbers of individuals are equally enormous. Some scientists have
estimated that there are 200 million insects for every single human
alive today! Insects have an unmatched ability to adapt to all land
environments and to virtually all climates. Many have exploited
freshwater and shoreline habitats, and have evolved extraordinary
abilities to survive adverse environmental conditions.

hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   441
hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   441

7/23/07   6:33:20 PM
7/23/07   6:33:20 PM

442

PART THREE  Diversity of Animal Life

 S ubphylum Hexapoda is named for the presence of  six legs

in members of the group. All legs are  uniramous . Hexapods
have  three tagmata —head, thorax, and abdomen—with
appendages on the head and thorax. Abdominal appendages are
greatly reduced or absent. There are two classes within Hexapoda:
Entognatha and Insecta ( Figure 21.1 ).

 Entognatha is a small group whose members have the bases
of mouthparts enclosed within the head capsule. There are three
orders of entognathans. Members of Protura and Diplura are
tiny, eyeless, and inhabit soils or dark, damp places where they
are rarely noticed. Members of Collembola are commonly called

springtails because of their ability to leap; an animal 4 mm long
may leap 20 times its body length. Collembolans live in soil, in
decaying plant matter, on freshwater pond surfaces, and along
the seashore. They can be very abundant, reaching millions per
hectare in some soils, but like other entognathans, their small
size makes them less visible to the casual observer.

 Insecta is an enormous class whose members have ecto-
gnathous mouthparts, where the bases of mouthparts lie out-
side the head capsule. Winged insects are called pterygotes,
and wingless insects are called apterygotes. Class Insecta con-
tains one group whose members diverged from ancestors of

Entognatha

Hexapoda

Paleoptera

Insecta

Neoptera

l

a
o
b
m
e

l
l

o
C

a
r
u
t
o
r
P

l

a
r
u
p
D

i

a
r
u
n
a
s
y
h
T

a
t
a
n
o
d
O

a
r
e
t
p
o
r
e
m
e
h
p
E

a
e
d
o
r
e
t
p
o
h
t
r

O

a
e
d
o
r
e
t
p
m
e
H

i

Biting/chewing
mouthparts

Piercing/sucking mouthparts

< 4 Malpighian tubules

Reduced wing venation

l

a
o
b
a
t
e
m
o
o
H

l

Compound eyes reduced

No ocelli

2–3 caudal filaments

Vestigial mouthparts
in adults

To
Crustacea

Entognathous mouthparts

Massive mandibles

Prehensile labium
in larval stage

Wings (Pterygota)

Hemimetabolous development

Holometabolous development

Wings fold back over body

6 legs

Direct development
Unique tracheal system

Malpighian tubules
“Whole-limb” mandibles

Loss of second antennae

Ectognathous mouthparts
Figure 21.1
Cladogram showing hypothetical relationships among hexapods. Many
synapomorphies have been omitted. Orders Protura, Collembola, and
Diplura are entognathous. These orders, plus Thysanura, originated
before the earliest winged ancestors. Orders Odonata and Ephemeroptera
form Paleoptera, where wings are outspread. The remaining orders
have wings that can fold back over the abdomen (Neoptera). Superorder
Orthopterodea includes orders Orthoptera, Blattodea, Phasmatodea,
Mantodea, Phasmantodea, Isoptera, Ptecoptera, Embiidina, and
Dermaptera. Hemipterodea includes orders Zoraptera, Psocoptera,
Hemiptera, Thysanoptera, and Phthiraptera; and superorder Holometabola
encompasses all holometabolous orders.

hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   442
hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   442

7/23/07   6:33:24 PM
7/23/07   6:33:24 PM

w w w . m h h e . c o m / h i c k m a n i p z 1 4 e

CHAPTER 21  Hexapods

443

the wingless order Thysanura, which forms the sister taxon to
all other insects. Insect wings evolved in a common ancestor of
the latter clade ( Figure 21.1 ). Thysanurans are called primitively
wingless to distinguish them from orders whose members do
not have wings now, but whose ancestors were winged.

   CLASS INSECTA
  Insecta (L.  insectus,  cut into) is the most diverse and abundant of
all groups of arthropods. There are more species of insects than
species of all other animals combined. The number of insect spe-
cies classiﬁ ed is currently at 1.1 million, but experts estimate that as
many as 30 million species may exist. There is also striking evidence
of continuing and sometimes rapid evolution among living insects.
 It is difficult to appreciate fully the ecological, medical,
and economic signiﬁ cance of this extensive group. The study
of insects  (entomology)  occupies the time and resources of
skilled men and women all over the world. The struggle between
humans and their insect competitors seems to be endless, yet
paradoxically insects have so interwoven themselves into the
economy of nature in so many useful roles that most terrestrial
ecosystems would collapse without them.

 Insects differ from other arthropods in having ectognathous
mouthparts and usually  two pairs of wings  on the thoracic
region of the body, although some have one pair of wings or
none. Insects range in size from less than 1 mm to 20 cm in
length, the majority being less than 2.5 cm long. Some of the
largest insects live in tropical areas.

   Distribution
 Insects are among the most abundant and widespread of all land
animals. They have spread into practically all habitats that sup-
port life except the sea. Relatively few are truly marine, but some
are common in intertidal zones. Marine water striders ( Halobates ),
which live on the  surface  of the ocean, are the only marine inver-
tebrates that live on the sea-air interface. Insects are common in
brackish water, in salt marshes, and on sandy beaches. They are
abundant in freshwater, in soil, in forests (especially the tropical
forest canopy), and they are found even in deserts and wastelands,
on mountaintops, and as parasites in and on plants and animals.

 Their wide distribution is made possible by their powers of
ﬂ ight and their highly adaptable nature. Insects evolved wings
and invaded the air 250 million years before ﬂ ying reptiles, birds,
or mammals. In most cases they can easily surmount barriers that
are virtually impassable to many other animals. Their small size
allows them to be carried by currents of both wind and water
to far regions. Their well-protected eggs can withstand rigorous
conditions and can be carried long distances by birds and other
animals. Their agility and ecological aggressiveness enable them
to occupy every possible niche in a habitat. No single pattern of
biological adaptation can be applied to them.

  Adaptability
 Insects have shown an amazing evolutionary adaptability, as
evidenced by their wide distribution and enormous diversity of

species. Most of their structural modiﬁ cations are in their wings,
legs, antennae, mouthparts, and alimentary canals. Such wide
diversity enables this vigorous group to use all available food
and shelter resources. Some are parasitic, some suck the sap of
plants, some chew the foliage of plants, some are predaceous,
and some live on the blood of various animals. Within these dif-
ferent groups, specialization occurs, so that a particular kind of
insect will eat, for instance, leaves of only one kind of plant. This
speciﬁ city of eating habits lessens competition with other species
and to a great extent accounts for their biological diversity.

 Insects are well adapted to dry and desert regions. Their
hard  and  protective  exoskeleton  limits  evaporation.  Some
insects also extract most of the water from food, fecal material,
and by-products of cell metabolism.

  External Form and Function
 Insects show a remarkable variety of morphological characteristics,
but, as in other arthropods, the exoskeleton is formed of a com-
plex system of plates called  sclerites,  connected by concealed,
ﬂ exible hinge joints. Muscles between sclerites enable insects to
make precise movements. Rigidity of their exoskeleton is attribut-
able to unique scleroproteins and not to its chitin component. It
is waterproof and its lightness makes ﬂ ying possible. By contrast,
the cuticle of crustaceans is stiffened mostly by minerals.

 Insects are much more homogeneous in tagmatization than
are Crustacea. Insect tagmata comprise a head, thorax, and
abdomen. The cuticle of each body segment typically is com-
posed of four plates (sclerites): a dorsal notum (tergum), a ven-
tral sternum, and a pair of lateral pleura. Pleura of abdominal
segments are often partially membranous rather than sclerotized.
Some insects are fairly generalized in body structure; some are
highly specialized. Grasshoppers, or locusts, are a generalized
type often used in laboratories to demonstrate general features
of insects ( Figure 21.2 ).

 The head usually bears a pair of relatively large compound
eyes, a pair of antennae, and usually three ocelli ( Figure 21.2 ).
Antennae, which vary greatly in size and form ( Figure 21.3 ), act
as tactile organs, olfactory organs, and in some cases as audi-
tory organs. Mouthparts, formed from specially hardened cuti-
cle, typically consist of a labrum, a pair each of mandibles and
maxillae, a labium, and a tonguelike hypopharynx. The type of
mouthparts that an insect possesses determines how it feeds. We
discuss some of these modiﬁ cations later in this chapter.

 The thorax comprises three segments: prothorax, mesotho-
rax, and metathorax, each bearing a pair of legs ( Figure 21.2 ). In
most insects the mesothorax and metathorax also bear a pair of
wings. Wings are cuticular extensions formed by the epidermis.
They consist of a double membrane containing veins of thicker
cuticle that serve to expand the wings after eclosion from the
pupa and to strengthen the wings aerodynamically. Although
these veins vary in their patterns among different taxa, they are
relatively constant within a family, genus, or species and serve as
one means of classiﬁ cation and identiﬁ cation.

 Legs of insects often are modified for special purposes.
Many terrestrial forms have walking legs with terminal pads and
claws. These pads may be sticky for walking upside down, as

hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   443
hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   443

7/23/07   6:33:25 PM
7/23/07   6:33:25 PM

444

PART THREE  Diversity of Animal Life

Ocelli

Compound eye

Frons

Clypeus
Mandible

Labrum

Tympanum

Forewing

Hindwing

Metathorax

Mesothorax

Prothorax

Compound
eye

Cercus

MALE

Spiracles

Ovipositor

Coxa

Trochanter

Femur

Tibia Tarsus

Sternum

Tergum

FEMALE

Maxillary
palp

Labial
palp

Antenna

Frons
Gena

Figure 21.2
A, External features
of a female
grasshopper. The
terminal segment
of a male with
external genitalia
is shown in inset.
B, Frontal view
of head. C, A
pair of lubber
grasshoppers,
Romalea guttata
(order Orthoptera),
copulating.

Silkworm larva

Silkworm moth

Japanese beetle

Checkered beetle

Yellow jacket

Syrphid fly

Figure 21.3
A few types of insect antennae.

in house ﬂ ies. The hindlegs of grasshoppers and crickets are
adapted for jumping ( Figure 21.4 ). Mole crickets have the ﬁ rst
pair of legs modiﬁ ed for burrowing in the ground. Water bugs
and many beetles have paddle-shaped appendages for swim-
ming. For grasping prey, the forelegs of a praying mantis are
long and strong ( Figure 21.5 ). The legs of honey bees show
complex adaptations for collecting pollen ( Figure 21.6 ).

Femur

Extensor muscle

Tibia

Flexor muscle

Tarsus

Figure 21.4
Hindleg of grasshopper. Muscles that operate the leg are found
within a hollow cylinder of exoskeleton. Here they are attached to
the internal wall, from which they manipulate segments of limb on
the principle of a lever. Note pivot joint and attachment of tendons of
extensor and ﬂ exor muscles, which act reciprocally to extend and ﬂ ex
the limb.

hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   444
hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   444

7/23/07   6:33:25 PM
7/23/07   6:33:25 PM

w w w . m h h e . c o m / h i c k m a n i p z 1 4 e

CHAPTER 21  Hexapods

445

Femur

Trochanter Coxa

Tibia

Velum
Antenna
cleaner
Metatarsus

Tarsus

Pollen
brush

Spur

Pollen
brush

Pollen
packer
(auricle)

Pollen basket

Pollen comb

Foreleg

Midleg

Hindleg
(medial view)

Hindleg
(lateral view)

Figure 21.6
Adaptive legs of worker honey bee. In the foreleg, the toothed indentation covered with the
velum combs out the antennae. The spur on the middle leg removes wax from wax glands on the
abdomen. Pollen brushes on the front and middle legs comb off pollen picked up on body hairs
and deposit it on the pollen brushes of the hindlegs. Long hairs of the pollen comb on the hindleg
remove pollen from the comb of the opposite leg; then the auricle (pollen packer) presses it into a
pollen basket when the leg joint is ﬂ exed back. A bee carries her load in both baskets to the hive
and pushes pollen into a cell, to be cared for by other workers.

A

B
Figure 21.5
A, Praying mantis (order Mantodea) feeding
on an insect. B, Praying mantis laying eggs.

 The insect abdomen comprises 9 to 11 segments; the eleventh,
when present, bears a pair of  cerci  (appendages at the posterior
end). Larval or nymphal forms may have a variety of abdominal
appendages, but these appendages are lacking in adults. The geni-
talia emerge from segments 8 and 9 of the abdomen ( Figure 21.2A ),
they are often useful in identiﬁ cation and classiﬁ cation.

 There  are  innumerable  variations  in  body  form  among
insects. Beetles are usually thick and plump (see  Figure 21.7A );
damselﬂ ies, ant lions, and walking sticks are long and slender
( Figure 21.7B ); many aquatic beetles are streamlined; butterﬂ ies
have the broadest wings of all; and cockroaches are ﬂ at, adapted
to living in crevices. The ovipositor of female ichneumon wasps is
extremely long ( Figure 21.8 ), whereas the anal cerci form forceps
in earwigs but are long and many-jointed in stoneﬂ ies and may-
ﬂ ies. The hymenopteran stinger is a modiﬁ ed ovipositor. Anten-
nae are long in cockroaches and katydids, short in dragonﬂ ies
and most beetles, knobbed in butterﬂ ies, and plumed in some
moths. Many other dramatic variations exist (see  Figure 21.3 ).
Perhaps most amazing is the fact that mouthparts, antennae, legs,
cerci, and ovipositors are all modiﬁ ed appendages.

  Locomotion
  Walking
 When walking, most insects use a triangle of legs
involving the ﬁ rst and last leg of one side together with the
middle leg of the opposite side. In this way, terrestrial insects

A

B

Figure 21.7
A, A giant horned
beetle, Diloboderus
abderus (order
Coleoptera), from
Uruguay. Though
the ferocious-looking
processes from the
head and thorax
might appear to
be for pinching
or stabbing an
opponent, they
actually are used
to lift or pry up a
rival of the same
species away from
resources. B, Walking
sticks, Diapheromera
femorata (order
Phasmatodea),
mating. The species is
common in much of
North America. It is
wingless, and despite
its camouﬂ age as a
twig, it is eaten by
numerous predators.

hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   445
hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   445

7/23/07   6:33:34 PM
7/23/07   6:33:34 PM

446

PART THREE  Diversity of Animal Life

Figure 21.8
An ichneumon wasp with the end of the abdomen raised to thrust
her long ovipositor into wood to ﬁ nd a tunnel made by the larva of a
wood wasp or wood-boring beetle. She can bore 13 mm or more into
the wood to lay her eggs in the larva of a wood-boring beetle, which
will become host for the ichneumon larvae. Other ichneumon species
attack spiders, moths, ﬂ ies, crickets, caterpillars, and other insects.

keep at least three of their six legs on the ground at all times—a
tripod arrangement that bestows stability.

 Some  insects,  such  as  water  striders,   Gerris   (L.   gero,   to
carry), can walk on the surface of water. A water strider has on
its footpads nonwetting hairs that do not break the surface ﬁ lm
of water but merely indent it. As it skates along on its two pairs
of posterior legs,  Gerris  uses its reduced and toothed pair of
prothoracic legs to capture and hold prey. Water striders exhibit
unusual cleaning behavior and may do complete ﬂ ips on the
water surface in an attempt to dislodge debris from their thoracic
terga ( Figure 21.9 ). Bodies of marine water striders,  Halobates
(Gr.  halos,  the sea,  (cid:1)   b¯ates , one that treads), excellent surfers on
rough ocean waves, are further protected by a water-repellent
coat of close-set hairs shaped like thick hooks.

   Power of Flight
 Insects are the only invertebrates that can
ﬂ y, and they share the power of ﬂ ight with birds and ﬂ ying mam-
mals. However, their wings evolved in a manner different from
limb buds of birds and mammals and are not homologous to
them. Insect wings are formed by outgrowths from the body wall

of the mesothoracic and metathoracic segments and are com-
posed of cuticle. Recent fossil evidence suggests that insects may
have evolved fully functional wings over 400 million years ago.
 Most insects have two pairs of wings, but Diptera (true ﬂ ies)
have only one pair ( Figure 21.10 ), the hindwings being repre-
sented by a pair of tiny  halteres  (balancers) that vibrate and are
responsible for equilibrium during ﬂ ight. Males of order Strepsip-
tera have only a hind pair of wings and an anterior pair of “hal-
teres.” Males of scale insects also have one pair of wings but no
halteres. Some insects are ancestrally (for example, silverﬁ sh) or
secondarily (for example, ﬂ eas) wingless. Reproductive female
ants shed their wings after their nuptial ﬂ ight (males die), and
reproductive male and female termites have wings, but workers
in both cases are wingless. Lice and ﬂ eas are always wingless.

 Wings may be thin and membranous, as in ﬂ ies and many
other groups (see  Figure 21.8 ); thick and horny, such as the front
wings of beetles (see  Figure 21.7A ); parchmentlike, such as the front
wings of grasshoppers; covered with ﬁ ne scales, as in butterﬂ ies
and moths; or covered with hairs, as in caddis ﬂ ies.

 Wing movements are controlled by a complex of muscles in
the thorax.  Direct ﬂ ight muscles  are attached to a part of the
wing itself.  Indirect ﬂ ight muscles  are not attached to the wing
and cause wing movement by altering the shape of the thorax.
The wing is hinged at the thoracic tergum and also slightly later-
ally on a pleural process, which acts as a fulcrum ( Figure 21.11 ).
In most insects, the upstroke of the wing is effected by contracting
indirect muscles that pull the tergum down toward the sternum
( Figure 21.11A ). Dragonﬂ ies and cockroaches accomplish the
downstroke by contracting direct muscles attached to the wings
lateral to the pleural fulcrum. In Hymenoptera and Diptera (see
p. 464) all major ﬂ ight muscles are indirect. The downstroke occurs
when the sternotergal muscles (muscles inserted on sternum
and tergum) relax and longitudinal muscles of the thorax contract

Figure 21.9
Water strider, Gerris sp.
(order Hemiptera). The
animal is supported on
its long, slender legs
by the water’s surface
tension.

Figure 21.10
House ﬂ y, Musca domestica (order Diptera). House ﬂ ies can become
contaminated with over 100 human pathogens, which may be
transferred to human and animal food by direct contact, regurgitated
food, and feces.

hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   446
hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   446

7/23/07   6:33:40 PM
7/23/07   6:33:40 PM

w w w . m h h e . c o m / h i c k m a n i p z 1 4 e

CHAPTER 21  Hexapods

447

Figure 21.11
A, Flight muscles of insects such as cockroaches, in which upstroke is
by indirect muscles and downstroke is by direct muscles. B, In insects
such as ﬂ ies and bees, both upstroke and downstroke are by indirect
muscles. C, The ﬁ gure-eight path followed by the wing of a ﬂ ying
insect during the upstroke and downstroke.

Direct and indirect flight muscles
of locusts and dragonflies

Indirect flight muscles
of flies and midges

A

B

C

and arch the tergum ( Figure 21.11B ), pulling up the tergal artic-
ulations relative to the pleura. The downstroke in beetles and
grasshoppers involves both direct and indirect muscles.

 Insectan ﬂ ight-muscle contraction has two basic types of neural
control:  synchronous  and  asynchronous.  Larger insects such as
dragonﬂ ies and butterﬂ ies have wings with synchronous muscles,
in which a single nerve impulse stimulates a muscle contraction
and thus one wing stroke. Wings with asynchronous muscles occur
in Hymenoptera, Diptera, Coleoptera, and some Hemiptera, see
pp. 463–464. Their mechanism of action is complex and depends
on the storage of potential energy in resilient parts of the thoracic
cuticle. As one set of muscles contracts (moving the wing in one
direction), they also stretch the antagonistic set of muscles, caus-
ing them to contract (and move the wing in the other direction).
Because muscle contractions are not in phase with nervous stimu-
lation, only occasional nerve impulses are necessary to keep the
muscles contracting and relaxing. Thus extremely rapid wing beats
are possible. For example, butterﬂ ies (with synchronous muscles)
may beat as few as four times per second. Insects with asynchro-
nous muscles, however, such as ﬂ ies and bees, may produce 100
beats per second or more. The fruit ﬂ y,  Drosophila  (Gr.  drosos,
dew,  (cid:1)   philos,  loving), can ﬂ y at 300 beats per second, and midges
have been clocked at more than 1000 beats per second.

 Obviously flying entails more than a simple flapping of
wings; a forward thrust is necessary. As indirect ﬂ ight muscles
alternate rhythmically to raise and to lower the wings, direct
ﬂ ight muscles alter the angle of the wings so that they act as
lifting airfoils during both upstroke and downstroke, twisting
the leading edge of the wings downward during the down-
stroke and upward during the upstroke. A ﬁ gure-eight move-
ment ( Figure 21.11C ) results, spilling air from the trailing edges
of the wings. The quality of forward thrust depends, of course,
on several factors, such as variations in wing venation, wing load

(grams of body weight divided by total wing area), how much
the wings are tilted, and wing length and shape.

 Flight speeds vary tremendously. The fastest ﬂ yers usually
have narrow, fast-moving wings with a strong tilt and a strong
ﬁ gure-eight component. Sphinx moths and horse ﬂ ies achieve
approximately 48 km (30 miles) per hour and dragonﬂ ies approx-
imately 40 km (25 miles) per hour. Some insects are capable of
long continuous ﬂ ights. Migrating monarch butterﬂ ies,  Danaus
plexippus  (Gr. after Danaus, mythical king of Arabia) (see  Fig-
ure 21.27A ), travel hundreds to thousands of miles south in the
fall, ﬂ ying at a speed of approximately 10 km (6 miles) per hour,
to reach their overwintering roosts in Mexico and California.

  Internal Form and Function
  Nutrition
 The digestive system ( Figure 21.12 ; see also Figure 32.9, p. 714)
consists of a foregut (mouth with salivary glands, esophagus,
crop for storage, and gizzard for grinding in some); a midgut
(stomach and gastric ceca); and a hindgut (intestine, rectum, and
anus). Some digestion may occur in the crop as food mixes with
enzymes from the saliva, but no absorption occurs there. The
main site for digestion and absorption is the midgut, and the ceca
may increase the digestive and absorptive area. Little absorption
of nutrients occurs in the hindgut (with certain exceptions, such
as wood-eating termites), but this is a major area for resorption
of water and some ions (see p. 451).

 Most insects feed on plant juices and plant tissues  (phy-
tophagous  or  herbivorous).  Some insects feed on speciﬁ c
plants; others, such as grasshoppers, eat almost any plant. Cat-
erpillars of many moths and butterﬂ ies eat foliage of only cer-
tain plants. Certain species of ants and termites cultivate fungus
gardens as a source of food.

hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   447
hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   447

7/23/07   6:33:51 PM
7/23/07   6:33:51 PM

448

PART THREE  Diversity of Animal Life

Figure 21.12
Internal structure of female grasshopper.

Heart

Ostia

Aorta

Proventriculus

Ovary

Colon

Crop

Brain

Esophagus

Labrum

Mouth

Rectum

Anus

Ovipositor

Vagina

Subesophageal
ganglion

Labium

Salivary
gland

Thoracic
ganglion

Gastric
ceca

Midgut

Malpighian
tubules

Abdominal
ganglion

Oviduct

Seminal
receptacle

 Many beetles and larvae of many insects live on dead ani-
mals  (saprophagous).  Some insects are  predaceous,  catching
and eating other insects as well as other types of animals (see
 Figure 21.5 ). However, the so-called predaceous diving beetle,
 Cybister ﬁ mbriolatus  (Gr.  kybist¯er,  diver), is not as predaceous as
once supposed, but is largely a scavenger.

 Many insects are  parasitic  as adults, as larvae, or, in some
cases, both juveniles and adults are parasites. For example, ﬂ eas
( Figure 21.13 ) live on blood of mammals as adults, but their lar-
vae are free-living scavengers. Lice ( Figures 21.14  and  21.15 ) are
parasitic throughout their life cycle. Many parasitic insects are them-
selves parasitized by other insects, a condition called  hyperpara-
sitism.  Larvae of many varieties of wasps live and complete much
of their metamophosis inside the bodies of spiders or other insects
( Figure 21.16 ), consuming their hosts and eventually killing them.
Because they always kill their hosts, they are known as  parasit-
oids  (a lethal type of parasite). Parasitoid insects are enormously
important in controlling populations of other insects.

 For each type of feeding, mouthparts are adapted in a spe-
cialized way.  Sucking mouthparts  usually form a tube and can
easily pierce the tissues of plants or animals. Mosquitos (order
Diptera) demonstrate this arrangement well. Their mandibles,

maxillae, hypopharynx, and labrum-epipharynx are elongated into
needlelike stylets, together forming a  fascicle  ( Figure 21.17C ),
which pierces the skin of their prey to enter a blood vessel. The
hypopharynx bears a salivary duct, and the labrum-epipharynx
forms a food channel. The labrum forms a sheath for the fascicle
that bends back during feeding ( Figure 21.17C ). In honey bees

Figure 21.14
Gliricola porcelli (order Phthiraptera), a chewing louse of guinea pigs.
Antennae are normally held in the deep grooves on the sides of the head.

Figure 21.13
Female human ﬂ ea, Pulex
irritans (order Siphonaptera).

Figure 21.15
The head and body
louse of humans,
Pediculus humanus
(order Phthiraptera),
feeding.

hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   448
hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   448

7/23/07   6:33:52 PM
7/23/07   6:33:52 PM

w w w . m h h e . c o m / h i c k m a n i p z 1 4 e

CHAPTER 21  Hexapods

449

most insects, but hemoglobin occurs in the hemolymph of some
species (especially aquatic immatures occupying environments
of low oxygen tension) and functions in oxygen transport.

  Gas Exchange
 Terrestrial animals require efﬁ cient respiratory systems that per-
mit rapid oxygen and carbon dioxide exchange but at the same
time restrict water loss. In insects this is the function of the  tra-
cheal system,  an extensive network of thin-walled tubes that
branch into every part of the body ( Figure 21.18 ). The tracheal
system of insects evolved independently of that of other arthrop-
odan groups such as spiders. The tracheal trunks open to the
outside by  spiracles,  usually two pairs on the thorax and seven
or eight pairs on the abdomen. A spiracle may be merely a hole
in the integument, as in primitively wingless insects, but there is
usually a valve or some other closing mechanism that reduces
water loss. The evolution of a tracheal system with valves must
have been very important in enabling insects to move into drier
habitats. Spiracles may also possess a ﬁ ltering device such as
a sieve plate or a set of interlocking bristles that prevents the
entrance of water, parasites, or dust into the tracheae.

  Tracheae  are composed of a single layer of cells and are lined
with cuticle that is shed during molts along with the outer cuticle.
Spiral thickenings of cuticle (called  taenidia ) support the tracheae
and prevent their collapse. Tracheae branch out into smaller tubes,
ending in very ﬁ ne, ﬂ uid-ﬁ lled tubules called  tracheoles  (lined
with cuticle, but not shed at ecdysis), which branch into a ﬁ ne net-
work over the cells. Large insects may have tracheae several mil-
limeters in diameter that taper down to 1 to 2  (cid:2) m. Tracheoles then
taper to 0.5 to 0.1  (cid:2) m in diameter. In one stage of silkworm larvae
it is estimated that there are 1.5 million tracheoles! Some lepidopter-
ous (moths and butterﬂ ies) larvae have an abdominal mass of tra-
cheoles that forms the structural and physiological equivalent of a
vertebrate lung. Scarcely any living cell is more than a few microm-
eters away from a tracheole. In fact, the ends of some tracheoles
actually indent the membranes of cells that they supply, so that
they terminate close to mitochondria. The tracheal system affords
efﬁ cient transport usually without use of oxygen-carrying pigments
in hemolymph, although hemoglobin is present in some.

 The tracheal system may also include  air sacs,  which are
apparently dilated tracheae without taenidia ( Figure 21.18A ).
They are thin walled and ﬂ exible and are most common in the
body cavity although they sometimes occur in appendages.
Air sacs may allow internal organs to change in volume dur-
ing growth without changing the shape of the insect, and they
reduce the weight of large insects. However, in many insects
the air sacs increase the volume of air inspired and expired.
Muscular movements in the abdomen draw air into the tracheae
and expand the sacs, which collapse on expiration. In some
insects—locusts, for example—additional pumping is provided
by telescoping the abdomen, pumping with the prothorax, or
thrusting the head forward and backward.

 Recent studies of insect respiration using X-rays have shown
that tracheal expansion and compression also occur in response
to movements of jaw or limb muscles. Contraction of these mus-
cles increases pressure inside the exoskeleton, and this elevated

B

A
Figure 21.16
A, Larval stage of the tomato hornworm, Manduca sexta (order
Lepidoptera). The more than 100 species of North American sphinx
moths are strong ﬂ iers and mostly nocturnal feeders. Their larvae are
called hornworms because of the large, ﬂ eshy posterior spine.
B, Hornworm parasitized by a tiny wasp, Apanteles (a parasitoid),
which laid its eggs inside the caterpillar. The wasp larvae have
emerged, and their pupae are formed on the caterpillar’s skin. Young
wasps emerge in 5 to 10 days, but the caterpillar dies.

the labium forms a ﬂ exible and contractile “tongue” covered with
many hairs. When a bee plunges its proboscis into nectar, the tip
of the tongue bends upward and moves back and forth rapidly.
Liquid enters the tube by capillary action and is drawn inside con-
tinuously by a pumping pharynx. In adult butterﬂ ies and moths,
mandibles are usually absent (they are always present in larvae),
and the maxillae form a long sucking proboscis ( Figure 21.17D )
for drawing nectar from ﬂ owers. At rest the proboscis coils into
a ﬂ at spiral. While feeding the proboscis extends and ﬂ uid is
pumped inside by pharyngeal muscles.

 House ﬂ ies, blow ﬂ ies, and fruit ﬂ ies have  sponging  and
 lapping mouthparts  ( Figure 21.17E ). At the apex of the labium
is a pair of large, soft lobes with grooves on the lower surface that
serve as food channels. These ﬂ ies lap liquid food or liquefy food
ﬁ rst with salivary secretions. Horse ﬂ ies not only sponge surface
liquids but pierce the skin with slender, tapering mandibles, and
then absorb blood.

  Chewing mouthparts  such as those of grasshoppers and
many other herbivorous insects are adapted for seizing and crush-
ing food ( Figure 21.17A ); those of most carnivorous insects are
sharp and pointed for piercing their prey. Mandibles of chewing
insects are strong, toothed plates whose edges can bite or tear
while the maxillae hold the food and pass it toward the mouth.
Enzymes secreted by the salivary glands provide chemical action
to aid the chewing process.

  Circulation
 A tubular heart creates a peristaltic wave (see  Figure 21.12 ) that
moves hemolymph (blood) forward through the only blood
vessel, a dorsal aorta. Accessory pulsatory organs help move
hemolymph into the wings and legs, and ﬂ ow is also facilitated
by body movements. Hemolymph consists of plasma and ame-
bocytes and apparently has little role in oxygen transport in

hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   449
hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   449

7/23/07   6:33:55 PM
7/23/07   6:33:55 PM

450

PART THREE  Diversity of Animal Life

Figure 21.17
Four types of
insect mouthparts.
A, Chewing
mouthparts of a
grasshopper.
B and C, Sucking
mouthparts of
a mosquito.
Parts of piercing
fascicle are shown
in cross section
(C). D, Sucking
mouthparts
of a butterﬂ y.
Mandibles are
absent, and
maxillae form a
long proboscis.
E, Sponging
mouthparts of a
house ﬂ y. A pair
of large lobes with
grooves on their
lower surface are
on the end of the
labium.

Right
mandible

Ocelli

Left
mandible

Right maxilla
with maxillary palp

Left maxilla
with maxillary palp

Maxillae

Hypopharynx

Labrum

Labium with
labial palps

A

GRASSHOPPER

D

BUTTERFLY

Labial lobes

Fascicle

Labrum

Mandible

Maxilla

Labium

Hypopharynx
with salivary canal

B

MOSQUITO

C

E

HOUSE FLY

pressure causes contraction of tracheae, effectively permitting
insects to exhale. When muscles involved in tracheal compres-
sion relax, tracheae expand due to the recoil by taenidial rings.
If tracheae contract when spiracles are closed, increased internal
pressure enhances oxygen diffusion to cells.

 In some very small insects, gas transport occurs entirely by
diffusion along a concentration gradient. Consumption of oxy-
gen causes a reduced pressure in their tracheae that pulls air
inward through the spiracles.

 The tracheal system is an adaptation for air breathing, but
many insects (nymphs, larvae, and adults) live in water. In small,
soft-bodied aquatic nymphs, gaseous exchange may occur by dif-
fusion through the body wall, usually into and out of a tracheal
network just under the integument. Aquatic nymphs of stoneﬂ ies,
mayﬂ ies, and damselﬂ ies have a variety of  tracheal gills,  which
are thin extensions of the body wall containing a rich tracheal
supply. Gills of dragonﬂ y nymphs are ridges in the rectum (rectal
gills) where gas exchange occurs as water enters and leaves.

    Although diving beetles,  Dytiscus  (Gr.  dytikos,  able to swim), can ﬂ y,
they spend most of their life in water as excellent swimmers. How
do they, and other aquatic insects, respire? They use an “artiﬁ cial gill”
in the form of a bubble of air (a plastron) held under the ﬁ rst pair
of wings. The bubble is kept stable by a layer of hairs on top of the
abdomen and is in contact with spiracles on the abdomen. Oxygen
from the bubble diffuses into their tracheae and is replaced by diffu-
sion of oxygen from the surrounding water. However, nitrogen from
the bubble diffuses into the water, slowly decreasing the size of the
bubble; therefore, diving beetles must surface every few hours to
replace the air. Mosquito larvae are not good swimmers but live just
below the surface, protruding short breathing tubes like snorkels to the
surface for air (see  Figure 21.23B ). Spreading oil on the water, a favor-
ite method of mosquito control, clogs their tracheae with oil and suf-
focates the larvae. “Rat-tailed maggots” of certain syrphid ﬂ ies have an
extensible tail that can stretch as much as 15 cm to the water surface.

hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   450
hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   450

7/23/07   6:33:58 PM
7/23/07   6:33:58 PM

w w w . m h h e . c o m / h i c k m a n i p z 1 4 e

CHAPTER 21  Hexapods

451

Taenidia

Protective
lattice

Valve

Hypodermis

Cuticle

Tracheoles

Nucleus of tracheal end cell

A

B

Figure 21.18
A, Generalized arrangement of insect tracheal system
(diagrammatic). Air sacs and tracheoles not shown.
B, Relationship of spiracle, tracheae, taenidia (chitinous
bands that strengthen the tracheae), and tracheoles
(diagrammatic).

Commissural
tracheae

Ventral
trachea

Dorsal
trachea

Spiracles

  Excretion and Water Balance
 Insects and spiders have each evolved independently a unique
excretory system consisting of  Malpighian tubules  that operate
in conjunction with specialized glands in the wall of the rectum.
Malpighian tubules, variable in number, are thin, elastic, blind
tubules attached to the juncture between the midgut and hindgut
( Figures 21.12  and  21.19A ). Free ends of the tubules lie in the
hemocoel and are bathed in hemolymph.

 The mechanism of urine formation in Malpighian tubules
of herbivorous insects appears to depend on a proton pump
that adds hydrogen ions to the lumen of the tubule. Hydrogen
ions are then exchanged for potassium ions ( Figure 21.19B ).
This primary secretion of ions pulls water with it by osmosis to
produce a potassium-rich ﬂ uid. Other solutes and waste materi-
als also are secreted or diffuse into the tubule. The predomi-
nant waste product of nitrogen metabolism in most insects is
uric acid, which is virtually insoluble in water (see p. 673). Uric
acid enters the upper end of tubules, where the pH is slightly
alkaline, as relatively soluble potassium and urate (abbreviated
KHUr in  Figure 21.19 ). As forming urine passes into the lower
end of tubules, potassium combines with carbon dioxide and is
reabsorbed as potassium bicarbonate (KHCO 3 ). As a result the
pH of the ﬂ uid becomes acidic (pH 6.6), and insoluble uric acid
(HUr) precipitates. As urine drains into the intestine and passes
through the hindgut, specialized rectal glands reabsorb chloride,
sodium (and in some cases potassium), and water.

 Since water requirements vary among different types of
insects, this ability to cycle water and salts is very important.
Insects living in dry environments may resorb nearly all water
from the rectum, producing a nearly dry mixture of urine and
feces. However, freshwater larvae need to excrete water as well
as to conserve salts. Insects that feed on dry grains need to con-
serve water and to excrete salt. In contrast, leaf-feeding insects
ingest  and  excrete  quantities  of  fluid.  For  example,  aphids
(p. 463) pass the excess ﬂ uid in the form of a sweetish material

Air sac

Malpighian
tubules

Midgut

Rectum

Poison
sac

A

KHUr

+ H2O

HUr

KHCO3

+ H2O

CO2

KHUr

+ H2O

KHCO3

+ H2O +

HUr

+ H2O

+ H2O

+

HUr

B

Figure 21.19
Malpighian tubules of insect. A, Malpighian tubules are located at the
juncture of the midgut and hindgut (rectum) as shown in the cutaway
view of a wasp. B, Function of Malpighian tubules. Hydrogen ions are
actively exchanged for potassium ions in the upper tubules. Water and
potassium acid urate (KHUr) follow. Potassium is resorbed with water
and other solutes in the rectum.

called  honeydew,  which is relished by other insects, especially
ants (see  Figure 21.33A ). Honeydew promotes growth of sooty
mold (fungus) on leaves of infested plants and “rains” on cars
parked beneath infested trees.

hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   451
hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   451

7/23/07   6:34:01 PM
7/23/07   6:34:01 PM

452

PART THREE  Diversity of Animal Life

  Nervous System
 The nervous system in general resembles that of larger crusta-
ceans, with a similar tendency toward the fusion of ganglia (see
 Figure 21.12 ). A number of insects have a giant ﬁ ber system.
There is also a stomodeal nervous system that corresponds in
function to the autonomic nervous system of vertebrates. Neu-
rosecretory cells located in various parts of the brain have an
endocrine function, but, except for their role in molting and
metamorphosis, little is known of their activity.

  Sense Organs
 Along with neuromuscular coordination, insects have unusually
keen sensory perception. Their sense organs are mostly micro-
scopic and are located chieﬂ y in the body wall. Each type usually
responds to a speciﬁ c stimulus including mechanical, auditory,
chemical, visual, and other stimuli.

  Mechanoreception
 Mechanical  stimuli  (those  involving
touch, pressure, and vibration) are detected by  sensilla.  A sensil-
lum may be simply a  seta,  or hairlike process, connected with
a nerve cell; a nerve ending just under the cuticle and lacking a
seta, or a more complex organ (scolophorous organ) consisting of
sensory cells with their endings attached to the body wall. Such
organs are widely distributed over the antennae, legs, and body.

  Auditory Reception
 Very sensitive setae (hair sensilla) or
tympanal organs may detect speciﬁ c frequencies of airborne
sounds. In tympanal organs a number of sensory cells (rang-
ing from a few to hundreds) extend to a very thin tympanic
membrane that encloses an air space in which vibrations are
detected. Tympanal organs occur in certain Orthoptera ( Fig-
ure 21.2 ), Hemiptera, and Lepidoptera. Most insects are fairly
insensitive to airborne sounds but can detect vibrations reaching
them through the substrate. Organs on the legs usually detect
vibrations of the substrate. Some nocturnal moths (for example,
family Noctuidae) can detect ultrasonic pulses emitted by bats
for echolocation (p. 627) and dive to
the ground when they perceive bats.

Ommatidium

Optic nerve

  Chemoreception
 C h e m o r e -
ceptors (for taste or smell) are usu-
ally bundles of sensory cell processes
often located in sensory pits. These
are often on mouthparts, but in many
insects they are also on the antennae,
and butterﬂ ies, moths, and ﬂ ies also
have them on the tarsi of the legs.
Chemical  sense  is  generally  keen,
and some insects can detect certain
odors  for  several  kilometers.  Many
patterns of insect behavior such as
feeding,  mating,  habitat  selection,
and host-parasite relations are medi-
ated through chemical senses. These
senses  also  play  a  crucial  role  in

responses of insects to artiﬁ cial repellents and attractants. For
example, an increase in carbon dioxide concentration, such as
would be caused by a potential host nearby, causes a resting
mosquito to begin ﬂ ying, then it follows gradients of warmth
and moisture and other cues to ﬁ nd its host. Diethyl toluamide
 (DEET),  a repellent, apparently blocks the mosquito’s ability to
sense lactic acid, thus preventing host location.

  Visual Reception
 Insect eyes are of two types, simple and
compound.  Simple eyes  are found in some nymphs and larvae
and in many adults. Most insects have three ocelli on their head.
Honey bees probably use ocelli to monitor light intensity and
photoperiod (length of day) but not to form images.

 Most adult insects have  compound eyes,  which may cover
much of the head. They consist of thousands of ommatidia—
6300 in the eye of a honey bee, for example. The structure of the
compound eye is similar to that of crustaceans ( Figure 21.20 ). An
insect such as a honey bee can see simultaneously in almost all
directions around its body, but it is more myopic than humans,
and images, even of nearby objects, are probably fuzzy. How-
ever,  most  flying  insects  rate  much  higher  than  humans  in
ﬂ icker-fusion tests. Flickers of light become fused in human eyes
at a frequency of 45 to 55 per second, but bees and blow ﬂ ies
can distinguish as many as 200 to 300 separate ﬂ ashes of light
per second. This is undoubtedly advantageous in analyzing a
fast-changing landscape during ﬂ ight.

 A bee can distinguish colors, but its sensitivity begins in
the ultraviolet range, which human eyes cannot see. Although
uniform in color to our perception, bee-pollinated ﬂ owers often
have petals with lines and angular shapes that differ in ultravio-
let (UV) light absorption and reﬂ ection. The lines and shapes of
UV absorption acts as a “nectar guide,” leading bees to nectar
in the ﬂ ower. Many insects, such as butterﬂ ies, also have vision
sensitive to red wavelengths, but honey bees are red-blind.

  Other Senses
 Insects also have well-developed senses for
temperature, especially on the antennae and legs, and for

Retinular cell

Corneal lens

Crystalline cone

Rhabdomere of
retinular cells

Pigment cells

Nerve axon

Ommatidium

Retinular cells

Cross section of
ommatidium

Compound eye

Figure 21.20
Compound eye of an insect. A single ommatidium is shown enlarged to the right.

hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   452
hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   452

7/23/07   6:34:02 PM
7/23/07   6:34:02 PM

w w w . m h h e . c o m / h i c k m a n i p z 1 4 e

CHAPTER 21  Hexapods

453

humidity, as well as for proprioception (sensation of mus-
cle stretch and body position), gravity, and other physical
properties.

  Neuromuscular Coordination
 Insects are active creatures with excellent neuromuscular coor-
dination. Arthropod muscles are typically cross-striated, just as
vertebrate skeletal muscles are. A ﬂ ea can leap a distance of
100 times its own length, and an ant can carry in its jaws a load
greater than its own weight. This sounds as though insect mus-
cle were stronger than that of other animals. Actually, however,
the force that a particular muscle can exert is related directly to
its cross-sectional area, not its length. Based on maximum load
moved per square centimeter of cross section, the strength of
insect muscle is relatively the same as that of vertebrate muscle.
The illusion of great strength of insects (and other small animals)
is simply a consequence of small body size.

A

    In terms of proportionate body length, a ﬂ ea’s jump would be
the equivalent of a 6-foot human executing a standing high jump
of 600 feet! Actually, a ﬂ ea’s muscles are not entirely responsible
for its jump; they cannot contract rapidly enough to reach the
required acceleration. Fleas depend on pads of  resilin,  a protein
with unusual elastic properties, which is also found in wing-hinge
ligaments of many other insects. Resilin releases 97% of its stored
energy on returning from a stretched position, compared with only
85% in most commercial rubber. When a ﬂ ea prepares to jump,
it rotates its hind femurs and compresses the resilin pads, then
engages a “catch” mechanism. In effect, it has cocked itself. To take
off, the ﬂ ea needs to exert a relatively small muscular action to
unhook the catches, allowing the resilin to expand.

  Reproduction
 Parthenogenesis occurs prominently in life cycles of some Hemip-
tera and Hymenoptera (see insect orders, pp. 463–464), but sex-
ual reproduction is the norm for insects. Sexes are separate and
various means are used to attract mates. A female moth releases
a powerful pheromone that males can detect for a great distance.
Fireﬂ ies use ﬂ ashes of light; some insects ﬁ nd each other by sounds
or color signals and by various kinds of courtship behavior.

 Once a mate has been attracted, fertilization is usually inter-
nal. Sperm may be released directly or packaged into spermato-
phores. During the evolutionary transition of ancestral insects
from  marine  to  terrestrial  life,  spermatophores  were  widely
used. Spermatophores may be transferred without copulation,
as in silverﬁ sh, where a male deposits a spermatophore on the
ground, then spins signal threads to guide a female to it. Alter-
natively, spermatophores may be deposited in the female vagina
(see  Figure 21.12 ) during copulation; in many cases, especially
in butterﬂ ies, nutrients are also passed to the female via the sper-
matophore. Copulation ( Figure 21.21 ) evolved much later than
indirect sperm transfer using spermatophores.

B
Figure 21.21
Copulation in insects (see also Figures 21.2B and 21.7B). A, Omura
congrua (order Orthoptera) are a kind of grasshopper found in Brazil.
B, Bluet damselﬂ ies, Enallagma sp. (order Odonata), are common
throughout North America. Here, a male still grasps a female after
copulation. The female (white abdomen) lays eggs in the water.

 Usually sperm are stored in the seminal receptacle of a female
in numbers sufﬁ cient to fertilize more than one batch of eggs.
Many insects mate only once during their lifetime, but others,
such as male damselﬂ ies, copulate several times per day.

 Insects usually lay a great many eggs. A queen honey bee,
for example, may lay more than 1 million eggs during her life-
time. On the other hand, some ﬂ ies are viviparous and bring
forth only a single offspring at a time. Insects that make no pro-
vision for care of their young may lay many more eggs than do
insects that provide for their young or those that have a very
short life cycle.

 Most species lay their eggs in a particular habitat to which
visual, chemical, or other cues guide them. Butterﬂ ies and moths
lay their eggs on the speciﬁ c kind of plant on which the caterpil-
lar must feed. For example, a tiger moth may look for a pigweed,

hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   453
hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   453

7/23/07   6:34:03 PM
7/23/07   6:34:03 PM

454

PART THREE  Diversity of Animal Life

a sphinx moth for a tomato or tobacco plant, and a monarch but-
terﬂ y for a milkweed plant ( Figure 21.22 ). Insects whose imma-
ture stages are aquatic characteristically lay their eggs in water
( Figure 21.23 ). A tiny braconid wasp lays her eggs on the cater-
pillar of the sphinx moth where the larvae will feed internally.
After feeding and growing within the caterpillar, the braconid
larvae emerge from the host and pupate externally within tiny
cocoons ( Figure 21.23 ). An ichneumon wasp, with unerring accu-
racy, seeks a certain kind of larva in which her young will live as

Adult butterfly
(imago)

Egg (ova)

Caterpillar
(larva)

Caterpillar
beginning to
pupate

Butterfly
emerging
from chrysalis

Chrysalis
(pupa)

Figure 21.22
Complete (holometabolous) metamorphosis in a butterﬂ y, Danaus
plexippus. Eggs hatch to produce ﬁ rst of several larval instars. Last
larval instar molts to become a pupa. Adult emerges at pupal molt.

B

A
Figure 21.23
A, Mosquito Culex (order Diptera) lays her eggs in small packets or
rafts on the surface of standing or slowly moving water. B, Mosquito
larvae are the familiar wrigglers of ponds and ditches. To breathe,
they hang head down, with respiratory tubes projecting through the
surface ﬁ lm of water. Motion of vibratile tufts of ﬁ ne hairs on the
head brings a constant supply of food to these ﬁ lter feeders.

parasitoids. Her long ovipositor may have to penetrate 1 to 2 cm
of wood to ﬁ nd a larva of a wood wasp or a wood-boring beetle
in which she will deposit her eggs (see  Figure 21.8 ).

    Metamorphosis and Growth
 Early development occurs within eggs, and hatching young
escape from eggs in various ways. During postembryonic devel-
opment most insects change in form, undergoing  metamorpho-
sis  (see  Figure 21.22 ). During this period they must undergo a
series of molts to grow, and each stage between molts is called
an  instar.

 Although metamorphosis occurs in many animals, insects
illustrate it more dramatically than any other group. The trans-
formation, for instance, of a hickory horned devil caterpillar into
a beautiful royal walnut moth represents an astonishing mor-
phological change. In insects metamorphosis is associated with
the evolution of wings, which are restricted to the reproductive
stage. Adults, in effect, have become mating and dispersal stages
for those species possessing ﬂ ight.

  Ametabolous (Direct) Development
 A few insects, such as silverﬁ sh and springtails, undergo direct
development. The young, or juveniles, are similar to adults
except in size and sexual maturation. Stages are egg, juvenile,
and adult. Primitively wingless insects are among those with this
type of development.

  Hemimetabolous (Incomplete) Metamorphosis
 Some insects undergo a  hemimetabolous  (Gr.  hemi,  half,  (cid:1)   met-
abol¯e,  change), or gradual (incomplete), metamorphosis. These
include grasshoppers, cicadas, mantids, and terrestrial bugs, which
have terrestrial young, and mayﬂ ies, stoneﬂ ies, dragonﬂ ies, and
aquatic bugs that lay their eggs in water and whose young are
aquatic. The young are called  nymphs,  and their wings develop
externally as budlike outgrowths in early instars and increase
in size as the animal grows by successive molts and becomes a
winged  adult  ( Figures 21.24  and  21.25 ). Aquatic nymphs in some
orders have tracheal gills or other modiﬁ cations for aquatic life
( Figure 21.26 ). The stages of hemimetabolous insects are egg,
nymph (several instars), and adult (see  Figure 21.25 ).

  The  biological  meaning of the word “bug” is a great deal more restric-
tive than in common English usage. People often refer to all insects
as “bugs,” even extending the word to include such non-animals as
bacteria, viruses, and glitches in computer programs. Strictly speaking,
however, a bug is a member of order Hemiptera and nothing else.

  Holometabolous (Complete) Metamorphosis
 Approximately 88% of insects undergo a complete or  holo-
metabolous  (Gr.  holo,  complete,  (cid:1)   metabol¯e,  change) meta-
morphosis, which separates physiological processes of growth

hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   454
hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   454

7/23/07   6:34:07 PM
7/23/07   6:34:07 PM

w w w . m h h e . c o m / h i c k m a n i p z 1 4 e

CHAPTER 21  Hexapods

455

B

A
Figure 21.24
A, Ecdysis in a cicada, Tibicen davisi (order Hemiptera). The old cuticle
splits along a dorsal midline as a result of increased blood pressure
and of air forced into the thorax by muscle contraction. The emerging
insect is pale, and its new cuticle is soft. The wings will be expanded
by blood pumped into veins, and the insect enlarges by taking in air.
B, An adult Tibicen davisi.

(larva) from those of differentiation (pupa) and reproduction
(adult) (see  Figure 21.22 ). In effect, each stage functions without
competition with the other stages, for larvae often live in entirely
different surroundings and eat different foods from adults. The
wormlike  larvae,  which usually have chewing mouthparts, are
known as caterpillars, maggots, bagworms, fuzzy worms, or
grubs. After a series of instars, a larva molts to enter a transitional
stage called a  pupa . Pupae are usually inactive and enveloped
by a case, which may take several different forms. Pupae are
nonfeeding and are the stage in which many insects also pass
the winter. The  adult  insect emerges (ecloses) from the over-
wintering pupa in the spring, revealing an insect with crumpled,
miniature wings. In a short time its wings expand and harden,
and the insect is on its way. The stages of a holometabolous
insect, then, are egg, larva (several instars), pupa, and adult (see
 Figure 21.22 ). Adults undergo no further molting.

  Physiology of Metamorphosis
 Hormones regulate metamorphosis in insects. Major endocrine
organs that are involved in development are the  brain,   pro-
thoracic (ecdysial) glands,   corpora cardiaca,  and  corpora
allata  (Figure 34.4, p. 757).

 The intercerebral part of the brain and the ganglia of the
nerve cord contain several groups of neurosecretory cells that
produce a brain hormone called  prothoracicotropic hormone
(PTTH).  These neurosecretory cells send their axons to paired
organs behind the brain, called corpora cardiaca, which serve
as storage and release organs for PTTH (and also produce other
hormones). PTTH is carried via the hemolymph to the protho-
racic gland, a glandular organ in the head or prothorax pro-
duces  molting hormone,  or  ecdysone  (ek-dï (cid:3) s¯on) in response
to PTTH. Ecdysone sets in motion certain processes that lead to
molting and discarding the old cuticle (ecdysis).

 Larval molting persists as long as  juvenile hormone  from
the corpora allata is present in sufﬁ cient amounts, along with
molting hormone in the hemolymph. Under these conditions,
each molt produces a larger larva (see Figure 34.4).

 In later instars, the corpora allata release progressively less
juvenile hormone. When juvenile hormone is at a very low level, a
larva molts to become a pupa (instead of a  larger  larva), and like-
wise, the cessation of juvenile hormone production in a pupa leads
to an adult at the next molt (metamorphosis). Control of develop-
ment is the same in hemimetabolous insects, except that there is
no pupa, and cessation of juvenile hormone production occurs in
the ﬁ nal nymphal instar. The corpora allata again become active
in adult insects, in which juvenile hormone is important in normal
sexual reproduction and gamete formation. The prothoracic glands
degenerate in adults of most insects, and adults do not molt.

 Insect hormones have been the focus of fascinating experi-
ments. For example, if the corpora allata (and thus juvenile hor-
mone) are removed surgically from a larva, the following molt is
a metamorphosis. Conversely, if the corpora allata from a young
larva are transplanted into a ﬁ nal larval instar, the latter can be
converted into a giant larva, because metamorphosis to a pupa
cannot occur.

Figure 21.25
Life history of a
hemimetabolous insect.

Egg

Nymphs

Adult chinch bug

hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   455
hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   455

7/30/07   9:36:35 AM
7/30/07   9:36:35 AM

456

PART THREE  Diversity of Animal Life

A

Figure 21.26
A, Stoneﬂ y, Perla sp. (order
Plecoptera). B, Ten-spot dragonﬂ y,
Libellula pulchella (order
Odonata). C, Nymph of dragonﬂ y.
Both stoneﬂ ies and dragonﬂ ies
have aquatic nymphs that
undergo gradual metamorphosis.

B

C

  Diapause
 Many animals, including many types of insects, undergo a period
of dormancy in their annual life cycle. In temperate zones there
may be a period of winter dormancy, called hibernation, or a
period of summer dormancy, called estivation, or both. There
are periods in the life cycle of many insects when eggs, larvae,
pupae, or even adults remain dormant for a long time because
external conditions are too harsh or unfavorable for survival in
states of normal activity. Thus the life cycle is synchronized with
periods of suitable environmental conditions and abundance of
food. Most insects enter a dormant state when some factor of the
environment, such as temperature, becomes unfavorable, and
dormancy continues until conditions again become favorable.

 However, some species have a prolonged arrest of growth that
occurs regardless of environment, whether or not favorable condi-
tions prevail. This type of dormancy is called  diapause  (di (cid:3) a-poz)
(Gr.  dia,  through, dividing into two parts,  (cid:1)   pausis,  a stopping),
and it is an important adaptation to survive adverse environmen-
tal conditions. Diapause is internally controlled in each species
and sometimes varies between subspecies within a species, but
it is usually initiated by a particular signal. In the environment of

an insect, such signals forecast adverse conditions to
come, for example, lengthening or shortening of days.
Thus photoperiod, or day length, is often a signal that
initiates diapause. After diapause is initiated, another
environmental signal is usually required to end it. Such
signal may be return of favorable temperature after a
prolonged period of cold or an occasion of rain after a
dry period, as in a desert.

 Diapause always occurs at the end of an active
growth stage of the molting cycle so that, when the
diapause period ends an insect is ready for another
molt. One species of the ant  Myrmica  reaches the
third instar stage in late summer. Many larvae do not
develop beyond this point until the following spring,
even if temperatures are mild or if the larvae are kept in
a warm laboratory. Depending on the species, insects
may enter diapause at any stage of their life cycle.

  Defense
 Insects as a group display many colors. This is espe-
cially true of butterflies, moths, and beetles. Even
within a species the color pattern may vary in a sea-
sonal way, and colors may differ between males and females.
Some color patterns and body forms in insects are highly adap-
tive in evasion of predation, such as those for  mimicry  (imi-
tation of a noxious species by a palatable one,  Figure 21.27 ),
 aposematic coloration  (warning coloration to advertise nox-
ious qualities), and  crypsis  (camouﬂ age in shape or coloration
to escape notice,  Figure 21.28 ).

 Besides color, insects have other methods of protecting
themselves. The cuticular exoskeleton affords good protection
for many. Some, such as stink bugs, have repulsive odors and
tastes; others protect themselves by a good offense, for many are
very aggressive and ﬁ ght (for example, bees and ants); and still
others are swift in running for cover when danger threatens.

 Many insects practice chemical warfare in a variety of inge-
nious ways. Some repel an assault by virtue of their bad taste,
odor, or poisonous properties; others use chemical exudates that
mechanically prevent a predator from attacking. Caterpillars of
some monarch butterﬂ ies ( Figure 21.27 ) assimilate cardiac glyco-
sides from certain species of milkweed (family Asclepiadaceae);
this substance confers unpalatability on larvae and adults and
induces vomiting in some (but not all) of their avian predators.

Figure 21.27
Mimicry in butterﬂ ies.
A, Monarch butterﬂ y is distasteful to, and
avoided by some birds because as a caterpillar
it fed on the acrid milkweed. B, The monarch
is mimicked by the smaller viceroy butterﬂ y,
Limenitis archippus, which feeds on willows
and may (or may not) be tasteful to birds, but
is not eaten because it so closely resembles the
monarch in color and markings. This kind of
mimicry is called Batesian mimicry, although
recent evidence argues for Müllerian mimicry.

A

B

hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   456
hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   456

7/23/07   6:34:11 PM
7/23/07   6:34:11 PM

w w w . m h h e . c o m / h i c k m a n i p z 1 4 e

CHAPTER 21  Hexapods

457

A

B

C

Figure 21.28
Crypsis (camouﬂ age) in insects. A, Estigena pardalis (order Lepidoptera) in Java resembles a dead leaf. B, Bizarre processes from the thorax of a
treehopper from Mexico, Sphongophorus sp. (order Hemiptera), masquerade as parts of the twig on which it feeds. C, Broken outlines and color of
a katydid (Dysonia sp., order Orthoptera) in Costa Rica give it the appearance of the leaves on which it has been feeding.

Bombardier beetles, on the other hand, produce an irritating spray,
which they aim accurately at attacking ants or other enemies.

  Behavior and Communication
 The keen sensory perceptions of insects make them extremely
responsive to many stimuli. Stimuli may be internal (physiologi-
cal) or external (environmental), and responses are governed
by both the physiological state of the animal and the pattern
of nerve pathways traveled by the impulses. Many responses
are simple, such as orientation toward or away from a stimulus,
for example, avoidance of light by a cockroach, or attraction of
carrion ﬂ ies to the odor of dead ﬂ esh.

 Much behavior of insects, however, is not a simple matter of
orientation but involves a complex series of responses. A pair of
dung beetles chew a bit of dung, roll it into a ball, and roll the
ball laboriously to where they intend to bury it after laying their
eggs in it ( Figure 21.29 ). Cicadas slit the bark of a twig and then
lay an egg in each of the slits. Female potter wasps  Eumenes
scoop clay into pellets, carry them one by one to a building site,
and fashion them into dainty little narrow-necked clay pots, into
each of which the wasp lays an egg. Then the mother wasp hunts
and paralyzes a number of caterpillars, pokes them into the open-
ing of a pot, and seals the opening with clay. Each egg, in its own
protective pot, hatches to ﬁ nd a well-stocked larder of food.

Figure 21.29
Dung beetles Canthon
pilularis (order
Coleoptera), chew off
a bit of dung, form it
into a ball, and then
roll it to where they
will bury it in soil. One
beetle pushes while
the other pulls. Eggs
are laid in the ball,
and larvae feed on the
dung. Dung beetles are
black, an inch or less in
length, and common in
pasture ﬁ elds.

 Much of such behavior is innate; however, learning is more
important than was once believed. The potter wasp, for exam-
ple, must learn where she has left her pots if she is to return to
ﬁ ll them with caterpillars one at a time. Social insects, which
have been studied extensively, are capable of most basic forms
of learning used by mammals. An exception is insight learning.
Apparently insects, when faced with a new problem, cannot
reorganize their memories to construct a new response.

  Some insects can memorize and perform in sequence tasks involv-
ing multiple signals in various sensory areas. Worker honey bees
have been trained to walk through mazes that involved ﬁ ve turns in
sequence, using such clues as color of a marker, distance between
two spots, or angle of a turn. The same is true of ants. Workers of
one species of  Formica  learned a six-point maze at a rate only two
or three times slower than that of laboratory rats. Foraging trips of
ants and bees often wind and loop in a circuitous route, but once a
forager has found food, the return trip is relatively direct. One inves-
tigator suggests that the continuous series of calculations necessary
to ﬁ gure the angles, directions, distance, and speed of the trip and
to convert it into a direct return could involve a stopwatch, compass,
and integral vector calculus. How an insect does this is unknown.

 Insects communicate with each other by means of chemical,
visual, auditory, and tactile signals.  Chemical  signals take the form
of  pheromones,  which are substances secreted by one individual
that affect behavior or physiological processes of another individual.
Many pheromones have been described. Like hormones, phero-
mones are effective in minute quantities. Known functions of various
pheromones include attraction of the opposite sex, release of certain
behavior patterns (for example, aggregation pheromones to enable
mass attack of bark beetles on a tree or for overwintering of ladybug
beetles), to fend off aggression, to mark trails and territories, and to
signal alarms. Social insects, such as bees, ants, wasps, and termites,
can recognize a nestmate—or an alien in the nest—by means of
identiﬁ cation pheromones. Social parasites escape detection—and
certain destruction—by imitating or duplicating pheromones pro-
duced by members of their host colony. Pheromones determine
caste in termites and to some extent in ants and bees. They are a
primary integrating force in populations of social insects.

hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   457
hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   457

7/23/07   6:34:17 PM
7/23/07   6:34:17 PM

458

PART THREE  Diversity of Animal Life

 Many insect pheromones have been isolated and identiﬁ ed.
Traps baited with pheromones have been used for many years
to monitor insects of economic importance. They can be used
to detect presence of an insect, such as a new arrival from a
neighboring area (tracking spread of European gypsy moth in
the United States or presence of European corn ear worms in a
ﬁ eld), or to monitor changes in population levels. Use of phero-
mone traps has become an important tool to detect potential
outbreaks, allowing sufﬁ cient time to plan remedial action.

  Sound production  and  reception  in insects have been
studied extensively, and although a sense of hearing is not pres-
ent in all insects, this means of communication is meaningful
to those insects that use it. Sounds serve as warning devices,
advertisement of territorial claims, or courtship songs. Sounds of
crickets and grasshoppers seem to be concerned with courtship
and aggression. Male crickets scrape the modiﬁ ed edges of their
forewings together to produce their characteristic chirping. The
long, drawn-out sound of male cicadas, a call to attract females,
is produced by vibrating membranes in a pair of organs on the
ventral side of the basal abdominal segment.

 There are many forms of  tactile communication,   such
as tapping, stroking, grasping, and antennae touching, which
evoke responses varying from recognition to recruitment and
alarm. Certain kinds of ﬂ ies, springtails, and beetles manufac-
ture their own  visual signals  in the form of  bioluminescence.
Best known of luminescent beetles are ﬁ reﬂ ies, or lightningbugs
(which are neither ﬂ ies nor bugs, but beetles), in which a ﬂ ash
of light helps to locate a prospective mate. Each species has its
own characteristic ﬂ ashing rhythm produced on the ventral side
of the last abdominal segments. Females ﬂ ash an answer to the
species-speciﬁ c pattern to attract males. This interesting “love
call” has been adopted by species of  Photuris,  which prey on
male ﬁ reﬂ ies of other species they attract ( Figure 21.30 ).

  Social Behavior
 Insects rank very high in the animal kingdom in their organi-
zation of social groups, and cooperation within more complex

Figure 21.30
Fireﬂ y femme fatale, Photuris
versicolor, eating a male
Photinus tanytoxus, which
she has attracted with false
mating signals.

groups depends heavily on chemical and tactile communication.
Social communities are not all complex, however. Some commu-
nity groups are temporary and uncoordinated, as are hibernating
associations of carpenter bees or feeding gatherings of aphids.
Some are coordinated for only brief periods, and some cooper-
ate more fully, such as tent caterpillars,  Malacosoma,  which join
in building a home web and feeding net. However, all of these
are open communities with limited social behavior.

 In the  eusocial  Hymenoptera (honey bees and ants) and
Isoptera (termites) a complex social life is necessary for per-
petuation  of  the  species.  They  involve  all  stages  of  the  life
cycle, communities are usually ongoing, all activities are col-
lective, and there is reciprocal communication and division of
labor. The society usually demonstrates polymorphism, or  caste
differentiation.

 Honey bees have one of the most complex organizations
in the insect world. Instead of lasting one season, their orga-
nization continues for an indeﬁ nite period. As many as 60,000
to 70,000 honey bees may live in a single hive. Of these, there
are three castes: a single sexually mature female, or  queen;  a
few hundred  drones,  which are sexually mature males; and the
rest are  workers,  which are sexually inactive genetic females
( Figure 21.31 ).

 Workers take care of young, secrete wax with which they
build the six-sided cells of honeycomb, gather nectar from ﬂ ow-
ers, manufacture honey, collect pollen, and ventilate and guard
the hive. Several drones fertilize a queen during her nuptial
(mating) ﬂ ight, at which time enough sperm is stored in her
seminal receptacle to last her a lifetime. Drones die after mating,
and those remaining in the hive at summer’s end are driven out
by workers and starve.

 Castes are determined partly by fertilization and partly by
what is fed to larvae. Drones develop parthenogenetically from
unfertilized eggs (and consequently are haploid); queens and
workers develop from fertilized eggs (and thus are diploid; see
haplodiploidy, p. 142). Female larvae that will become queens

Figure 21.31
Queen bee surrounded by
her court. The queen is the
only egg layer in the colony.
The attendants, attracted by
her pheromones, constantly
lick her body. As food and
the queen’s pheromones are
transferred from these bees to
others, the queen’s presence is
communicated throughout the
colony.

hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   458
hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   458

7/23/07   6:34:22 PM
7/23/07   6:34:22 PM

w w w . m h h e . c o m / h i c k m a n i p z 1 4 e

CHAPTER 21  Hexapods

459

are fed royal jelly, a secretion from the salivary glands of nurse
workers. Royal jelly differs from the “worker jelly” fed to ordinary
larvae, but components in it that are essential for queen determi-
nation have not yet been identiﬁ ed. Honey and pollen are added
to worker diet about the third day of larval life. Pheromones in
“queen substance,” which is produced by a queen’s mandibular
glands, prevent female workers from maturing sexually. Work-
ers produce royal jelly only when the level of “queen substance”
pheromone in the colony drops, most typically due to overcrowd-
ing. This change also occurs when the queen becomes too old,
dies, or is removed. Then workers’ ovaries develop, and they start
enlarging a larval cell and feeding a larva royal jelly to produce
a new queen. Production of a new queen may be followed by
swarming where the old queen leaves with part of the colony.

 Honey bees have evolved an efﬁ cient system of communi-
cation by which, through certain body movements, their scouts
inform workers of the location and quantity of food sources
(Figure 36.23, p. 800).

 Termite colonies contain several castes, consisting of fertile
individuals, both males and females, and immature individuals
( Figure 21.32 ). Some fertile individuals may have wings and may
leave the colony, mate, lose their wings, and as  king  and  queen
start a new colony. Wingless fertile individuals may under certain
conditions substitute for the king or queen. Immature members
are wingless and become  workers  and  soldiers.  Soldiers have
large heads and mandibles and serve to defend the colony. As in
bees and ants, extrinsic factors cause caste differentiation. Repro-
ductive individuals and soldiers secrete inhibiting pheromones that
pass throughout the colony to nymphs through a mutual feeding
process, called  trophallaxis,  so that they become sterile workers.
Workers also produce pheromones, and if the level of “worker
substance” or “soldier substance” falls, as might happen after an
attack by marauding predators, for example, the next generation
produces compensating proportions of the appropriate caste.

 Ants also have highly organized societies. Superﬁ cially, they
resemble termites, but they are related to bees and wasps in
the order Hymenoptera and can be distinguished easily. In con-
trast to termites, ants are usually dark in color, are hard bod-
ied, and have a constriction posterior to their ﬁ rst abdominal
somite. Antennae of ants are elbowed, while those of termites
are threadlike or resemble a string of beads (moniliform).

B

A
Figure 21.32
A, Termite workers, Reticulitermes ﬂ avipes (order Isoptera), eating
yellow pine. Workers are wingless immature animals that tend the
nest. B, Termite queen becomes a distended egg-laying machine. The
queen and several workers and soldiers are shown here.

Figure 21.33
A, An ant (order
Hymenoptera) tending
a group of aphids (order
Homoptera). The aphids feed
copiously on plant juices and
excrete the excess as a clear
liquid rich in carbohydrates
(“honeydew”), which is
cherished as a food by ants.
B, A weaver ant nest in
Australia.

A

B

 In ant colonies males die soon after mating and the queen
either starts her own new colony or joins some established col-
ony and does the egg laying. Sterile females are wingless work-
ers and soldiers that do work of the colony: gather food, care
for young, and protect the colony. In many larger colonies there
may be two or three types of individuals within each caste.

 Ants have evolved some striking patterns of “economic”
behavior,  such  as  making  slaves,  farming  fungi,  herd-
ing  “ant  cows”  (aphids  or  other  members  of  Sternorrhyn-
cha) ( Figure 21.33A ), sewing their nests together with silk
( Figure 21.33B ), and using tools.

      INSECTS AND HUMAN WELFARE
   Beneﬁ cial Insects
 Although most of us think of insects primarily as pests, all
terrestrial life, including human life, would have great difﬁ -
culty surviving if all insects were suddenly to disappear. Some

hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   459
hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   459

7/23/07   6:34:35 PM
7/23/07   6:34:35 PM

460

PART THREE  Diversity of Animal Life

A
Figure 21.34
Some beneﬁ cial insects. A, A predaceous stink bug (order Hemiptera) feeds on a caterpillar. Note the sucking proboscis of the bug. B, A ladybug
beetle (order Coleoptera). Adults (and larvae of most species) feed voraciously on plant pests such as mites, aphids, scale insects, and thrips.
C, A parasitic wasp (Larra bicolor) attacking a mole cricket. The wasp drives the cricket from its burrow, then stings and paralyzes it. After the wasp
deposits her eggs, the mole cricket recovers and resumes an active life—until it is killed by developing wasp larvae.

B

C

produce  useful  materials:  honey  and  beeswax  from  bees,
silk from silkworms, and shellac from a wax secreted by lac
insects. More important, however, insects are necessary for the
cross-fertilization of many crops. Bees pollinate almost $14 bil-
lion worth of food crops per year in the United States alone,
and this ﬁ gure does not include pollination of forage crops for
livestock or pollination by other insects.

 Very early in their evolution, insects and ﬂ owering plants
formed a relationship of mutual adaptations  (coevolution)  that
have been to each other’s advantage. Insects exploit ﬂ owers for
food, and ﬂ owers exploit insects for pollination. Each ﬂ oral devel-
opment of petal and sepal arrangement is correlated with the
sensory array of certain pollinating insects. Among these mutual
adaptations are amazing devices of allurements, traps, specialized
structures, nectar guides (p. 452), and precise timing.

 Many predaceous insects, such as tiger beetles, aphid lions,
ant lions, praying mantids, and ladybug beetles, destroy harmful
insects ( Figure 21.34 ). Parasitoid insects are very important in
controlling populations of many harmful insects. Dead animals
are quickly consumed by maggots hatched from eggs laid in
carcasses. In turn, insects serve as important sources of food for
many other animals.

   Harmful Insects
 Harmful insects include those that eat and destroy plants and
fruits, such as grasshoppers, chinch bugs, corn borers, boll
weevils, grain weevils, San Jose scale, and hundreds of others
( Figure 21.35 ). Nearly every cultivated crop has several insect
pests. People expend enormous resources in all agricultural

A

B

C

Figure 21.35
Some insect pests. A, Japanese beetles, Popillia japonica (order Coleoptera), are serious pests of fruit trees and ornamental shrubs. They were
introduced into the United States from Japan in 1917. B, Longtailed mealybug, Pseudococcus longispinus (order Hemiptera). Many mealybugs are
pests of commercially valuable plants. C, Corn ear worms, Heliothis zea (order Lepidoptera). An even more serious pest of corn is the infamous corn
borer, an import from Europe in 1908 or 1909.

hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   460
hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   460

7/23/07   6:34:41 PM
7/23/07   6:34:41 PM

w w w . m h h e . c o m / h i c k m a n i p z 1 4 e

CHAPTER 21  Hexapods

461

activities, in forestry, and in the food industry to counter insects
and the damage they cause. Outbreaks of bark beetles or defo-
liators such as spruce budworms, hemlock woolly adelgids, and
gypsy moths have caused tremendous economic losses and
have become a major element in determining the composition
of forests in the United States. Gypsy moths, introduced into the
United States in 1869 in an ill-advised attempt to breed a better
silkworm, have spread throughout the northeast as far south
as Virginia and as far west as Minnesota. They defoliate for-
ests in years when there are outbreaks. In 1981, they defoliated
13 million acres in 17 northeastern states.

 Ten percent of all arthropod species are parasitic insects, or
insects that in essence are “micropredators” because they attack but
do not remain on their hosts. Lice, bloodsucking ﬂ ies, warble ﬂ ies,
bot ﬂ ies, and many others attack humans or domestic animals or
both. Malaria, carried by  Anopheles  mosquitos ( Figure 21.36 ), is still
one of the world’s major diseases, infecting hundreds of millions
of people each year and causing millions of deaths. Mosquitos also
transmit yellow fever and lymphatic ﬁ lariasis. Fleas carry plague,
which at times in history has killed signiﬁ cant portions of human
populations. House ﬂ ies are vectors of typhoid, as are lice for
typhus fever; tsetse ﬂ ies carry African sleeping sickness; and blood-
sucking bugs,  Rhodnius  and related genera, transmit Chagas’s dis-
ease. The newest viral plague to hit North America, the West Nile
virus, is carried by over 40 species of mosquito, especially  Culex,
and infects humans, some other mammals, and over 75 species of
birds, some of which serve as reservoirs for the virus.

 There is tremendous destruction of food, clothing, and
property by weevils, cockroaches, ants, clothes moths, ter-
mites, and carpet beetles. Not the least of insect pests are
bedbugs,  Cimex,   bloodsucking hemipterous insects whose
association with humans originated from bats that shared their
caves early in human evolution. Bedbug infestation is rising
throughout the developed world for unknown reasons. Pro-
posed explanations include increased importation of bugs by
travelers and reluctance to use insecticides.

Figure 21.36
A mosquito, Anopheles quadrimaculatus (order Diptera). Anopheles
spp. are vectors of malaria.

Classiﬁ cation of Subphylum Hexapoda
Class Entognatha (en(cid:3)tog-natha) (Gr. entos, within, inside,
(cid:1) gnathos, jaw): entognaths. Base of mouthparts lies within
head capsule; mandibles have one articulation. Example:
Entomobrya.
Class Insecta (in-sek(cid:3)ta) (L. insectus, cut into):
insects. Bases of mouthparts exposed and exiting head
capsule; mandibles usually have two regions of articulation.
Examples: Drosophila, Bombus, Anopheles (insect orders
listed on pp. 462–464).

   Control of Insects
 Because all insects are an integral part of the ecological com-
munities to which they belong, their total destruction would
obviously do more harm than good. All terrestrial food webs
would be seriously disturbed or destroyed. The beneﬁ cial role
of insects in our environment is often overlooked, and in our
zeal to control the pests we spray the landscape indiscrimi-
nately with extremely effective “broad-spectrum” insecticides
that eradicate good, as well as harmful, insects. We have also
found, to our dismay, that many chemical insecticides persist
in the environment and accumulate as residues in the bod-
ies of animals higher in the food chain, including ourselves.
Furthermore, many insects have evolved a resistance to insec-
ticides in common use. Honey bees are especially susceptible
to insecticides, and resistance mainly is developed by harmful
insects.

 In recent years, methods of control other than chemical
insecticides have been under intense investigation, experimen-
tation, and development. Economics, concern for the environ-
ment, and consumer demand are causing thousands of farmers
across the United States to use alternatives to strict dependence
on chemicals.

 Many organisms useful in the biological control of insects
are  currently  being  used  or  are  under  scientific  investiga-
tion.  These  organisms  include  bacterial,  viral,  and  fungal
pathogens.  For  example,  a  bacterium,   Bacillus  thuringi-
ensis,   produces a toxin that is quite effective in control of
lepidopteran pests (cabbage looper, imported cabbage worm,
tomato worm, gypsy moth). Other strains of  B. thuringiensis
have toxins that kill insects in other orders, and the species
diversity of target insects is being widened by techniques of
genetic engineering. Genes coding for the toxin produced by
 B. thuringiensis  also have been introduced into other bacteria
and even into the plants themselves, which makes the plants
resistant to insect attack. Many of our grain crops, especially
corn, now possess genes that express protein toxic to spe-
ciﬁ c insect pests, thereby obviating the need for pesticides.
However, some insects have now evolved resistance to the
B. thuringiensis  toxin.

hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   461
hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   461

7/23/07   6:34:50 PM
7/23/07   6:34:50 PM

462

PART THREE  Diversity of Animal Life

Classiﬁ cation of Class Entognatha and Class Insecta
Entomologists do not all agree on names of orders or on the
limits of each order. Some choose to combine and others to divide
the groups. However, this synopsis of orders is one that is rather
widely accepted.
I. Class Entognatha

Order Protura (pro-tu(cid:3)ra) (Gr. protos, ﬁ rst, (cid:1) oura, tail).
Minute (1 to 1.5 mm); no eyes or antennae; appendages on
abdomen as well as thorax; live in soil and dark, humid places;
direct development.
Order Diplura (dip-lu(cid:3)ra) (Gr. diploos, double, (cid:1) oura, tail):
japygids and campodeids. Usually less than 10 mm; pale,
eyeless; a pair of long terminal ﬁ laments or pair of caudal
forceps; live in damp humus or rotting logs; development direct.
Order Collembola (col-lem(cid:3)bo-la) (Gr. kolla, glue, (cid:1) embolon,
peg, wedge): springtails, jumping bristletails, and snow
ﬂ eas. Small (5 mm or less); compound eyes lacking, eye
patches of 1 to several lateral ocelli; respiration by trachea or
body surface; a springing organ folded under the abdomen for
leaping; abundant in soil; sometimes swarm on pond surface
ﬁ lm or on snowbanks in spring; development direct.

II. Class Insecta

Subclass Apterygota

Order Thysanura (thy-sa-nu(cid:3)ra) (Gr. thysanos, tassel,
(cid:1) oura, tail): silverﬁ sh (Figure 21.37) and bristletails.
Small to medium size; large eyes; long antennae; three long
terminal cerci; live under stones and leaves and around
human habitations; development direct.

Subclass Pterygota

1. Infraclass Paleoptera

Order Ephemeroptera (e-fem-er-op(cid:3)ter-a) (Gr.
eph¯emeros, lasting but a day, (cid:1) pteron, wing): mayﬂ ies
(Figure 21.38). Wings membranous; forewings larger than
hindwings; adult mouthparts vestigial; nymphs aquatic,
with lateral tracheal gills.
Order Odonata (o-do-na(cid:3)ta) (Gr. odontos, tooth,
(cid:1) ata, characterized by): dragonﬂ ies, damselﬂ ies
(Figure 21.21B and 21.26B). Large; membranous wings
are long, narrow, net veined, and similar in size; long and
slender body; aquatic nymphs with gills and prehensile
labium for capture of prey.

2. Infraclass Neoptera

Order Orthoptera (or-thop(cid:3)ter-a) (Gr. orthos, straight,
(cid:1) pteron, wing): grasshoppers (Figure 21.2), locusts,
crickets, katydids. Wings, when present, with forewings
thickened and hindwings folded like a fan under
forewings; chewing mouthparts.
Order Blattodea (blə-(cid:3)t¯o-d¯eə) (L. blatta, cockroach,
(cid:1) Gr. eidos, form, (cid:1) ea, characterized by): cockroaches.
Common insects in tropical areas; often in houses in
northern areas; oval, ﬂ attened bodies may exceed 5 cm
in length; tarsi with 5 segments; wings typically present,
often reduced.

Order Phasmatodea (faz-mə-(cid:3)t¯o-d¯eə) (Gr. phasma, apparition, (cid:1)
eidos, form, (cid:1) ea, characterized by): walkingsticks (Figure 21.7B)

Antenna

Eye

Wing pad

Hind leg

Gills

Cercus

Median caudal
filament

A

B

Figure 21.37
Silverﬁ sh Lepisma (order Thysanura) is often found in homes.

Figure 21.38
Mayﬂ y (order Ephemeroptera). A, Nymph. B, Adult.

hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   462
hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   462

7/23/07   6:34:53 PM
7/23/07   6:34:53 PM

w w w . m h h e . c o m / h i c k m a n i p z 1 4 e

CHAPTER 21  Hexapods

463

Classiﬁ cation of Class Entognatha and Class Insecta
and leaf insects. Bodies elongated and sticklike or ﬂ attened and
laterally expanded; herbivorous, tropical forms may be very large
(up to 30 cm).
Order Mantodea (man-(cid:3)t¯o-d¯eə) (Gr. mantis, soothsayer, (cid:1) eidos,
form, (cid:1) ea, characterized by): mantids (Figure 21.5). Bodies
elongated with raptorial front legs; predatory; may reach 10 cm in
length.
Order Mantophasmatodea (man-(cid:3)t¯o-faz-mə-(cid:3)t¯o-d¯eə) (an
amalgamation of the order names for praying mantids [Mantodea]
and walkingsticks [Phasmatodea]): gladiators. Secondarily
wingless; chewing mouthparts; resemble a combination of a
praying mantis and a walkingstick; nocturnal predators, on insects
and spiders; described in 2002; rare, found in Africa; 6 to 8 species.
Order Dermaptera (der-map(cid:3)ter-a) (Gr. derma, skin,
(cid:1) pteron, wing): earwigs. Very short forewings; large and
membranous hindwings folded under forewings when at rest;
chewing mouthparts; forcepslike cerci.
Order Plecoptera (ple-kop(cid:3)ter-a) (Gr. plekein, to twist, (cid:1) pteron,
wing): stoneﬂ ies (Figure 21.26A). Membranous wings; larger and
fanlike hindwings; aquatic nymph with tufts of tracheal gills.
Order Isoptera (i-sop(cid:3)ter-a) (Gr. isos, equal, (cid:1) pteron, wing):
termites (Figure 21.32). Small; membranous, narrow wings similar
in size with few veins; wings shed at maturity; erroneously called
“white ants”; distinguishable from true ants by broad union of
thorax and abdomen; complex social organization.
Order Embiidina (em-b¯e-ə(cid:3)di-nə) (Gr. embios, lively, (cid:1) eidos,
form, (cid:1) ina, resembling): webspinners. Small; male wings
membranous, narrow, and similar in size; wingless females;
chewing mouthparts; colonial; make silk-lined channels in tropical
soil.
Order Psocoptera (so-cop(cid:3)ter-a) (Gr. psoco, rub away, (cid:1) pteron,
wing) (Corrodentia): psocids, book lice, bark lice. Body usually
small, may be as large as 10 mm; membranous, narrow wings with
few veins, usually held rooﬂ ike over abdomen when at rest; some
wingless species; found in books, bark, bird nests, on foliage.
Order Zoraptera (zo-rap(cid:3)ter-a) (Gr. z¯oros, pure, (cid:1) apteryos,
wingless): zorapterans. As large as 2.5 mm; membranous, narrow
wings usually shed at maturity; colonial and termitelike.
Order Phthiraptera (th1¯–rap(cid:3)-ter-a) (Gr. phteir, louse, (cid:1) apteros,
wingless): lice. Wingless ectoparasites adapted for clinging to
warm-blooded hosts. Sucking lice (Figure 21.15) in former order
Anoplura now constitute suborder Anoplura, mouthparts adapted
for piercing and sucking, includes head lice, crab lice, and body
lice. Chewing lice (Figure 21.14) in former order Mallophaga now
divided among three suborders.
Order Thysanoptera (thy-sa-nop(cid:3)ter-a) (Gr. thysanos, tassel,
(cid:1) pteron, wing): thrips. Length 0.5 to 5 mm (a few longer); wings,
if present, long, very narrow, with few veins, and fringed with long
hairs; sucking mouthparts; destructive plant-eaters, but some feed
on insects.
Order Hemiptera (he-mip(cid:3)ter-a) (Gr. hemi, half, (cid:1) pteron,
wing). Members have unique mouthparts specialized for
piercing and sucking. Hemiptera is divided into three suborders:
Heteroptera, Auchenorrhyncha, and Sternorrhyncha. Heteroptera
contains true bugs; size 2 to 100 mm; wings present or absent;

forewings with basal portion thickened and partly sclerotized;
apical portion membranous; hindwings membranous; at rest,
wings held ﬂ at over abdomen; many with odorous scent glands;
includes water scorpions, water striders (Figure 21.9), bedbugs,
squash bugs, assassin bugs, chinch bugs, stink bugs, plant
bugs, lace bugs, and many others. Auchenorrhyncha contains
hoppers (Figures 21.30 and 21.39) and cicadas (Figure 21.26);
four wings typical if wings are present. Sternorrhyncha contains
whiteﬂ ies, psyllids, aphids, mealybugs (Figure 21.35B), and
scale insects; four wings typical if wings are present; often with
complex life histories; many species are plant pests.
Order Neuroptera (neu-rop(cid:3)ter-a) (Gr. neuron, nerve, (cid:1) pteron,
wing): dobsonﬂ ies, ant lions (Figure 21.40), lacewings. Medium
to large size; similar, membranous wings with many cross veins;
chewing mouthparts; dobsonﬂ ies with greatly enlarged mandibles
in males, and with aquatic larvae; ant lion larvae (doodlebugs)
make craters in sand to trap ants.
Order Coleoptera (ko-le-op(cid:3)ter-a) (Gr. koleos, sheath, (cid:1) pteron,
wing): beetles (Figures 21.7A, 21.29, 21.35A), including ﬁ reﬂ ies
(Figure 21.30) and weevils (Figure 21.41D). The largest order of
animals in the world with 250,000 described species; front wings
(elytra) thick, hard, opaque; membranous hindwings folded under
front wings at rest; mouthparts for biting and chewing; includes

Figure 21.39
Oak treehoppers, Platycotis vittata (order Hemiptera).

Figure 21.40
Adult ant lion (order Neuroptera).

hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   463
hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   463

7/23/07   6:34:55 PM
7/23/07   6:34:55 PM

464

PART THREE  Diversity of Animal Life

Classiﬁ cation of Class Entognatha and Class Insecta
ground beetles, carrion beetles, whirligig beetles, darkling beetles,
stag beetles, dung beetles, diving beetles, boll weevils, and many
others.
Order Strepsiptera (strep-sip(cid:3)ter-a) (Gr. strepsis, a turning,
(cid:1) pteron, wing): stylops or twisted wing parasites. Females
wingless, without eyes or antennae; males with vestigial forewings
and fan-shaped hindwings; females and larvae parasites of bees,
wasps, and other insects.
Order Mecoptera (me-kop(cid:3)ter-a) (Gr. mekos, length, (cid:1) pteron,
wing): scorpionﬂ ies. Small to medium size; wings long, slender,
with many veins; at rest, wings held rooﬂ ike over back; males have
scorpion-like clasping organ at end of abdomen; carnivorous; live
in most woodlands.
Order Lepidoptera (lep-i-dop(cid:3)ter-a) (Gr. lepidos, scale, (cid:1) pteron,
wing): butterﬂ ies (Figure 21.41A) and moths. Membranous
wings covered with overlapping scales; wings coupled or
overlapping; mouthparts a sucking tube, coiled when not in
use; larvae (caterpillars) with chewing mandibles for plant
eating, stubby prolegs on abdomen, and silk glands for spinning
cocoons; antennae knobbed in butterﬂ ies, and usually ﬁ lamentous
(sometimes plumed) in moths (Figure 21.41B).
Order Diptera (dip(cid:3)ter-a) (Gr. di, two, (cid:1) pteron, wing): true ﬂ ies
(Figure 21.10). Single pair of wings, membranous and narrow;

hindwings reduced to inconspicuous balancers (halteres); sucking
mouthparts or adapted for sponging, lapping, or piercing; legless
larvae (maggots); includes crane ﬂ ies, mosquitos, moth ﬂ ies,
midges, fruit ﬂ ies, ﬂ esh ﬂ ies, house ﬂ ies, horse ﬂ ies, bot ﬁ les, blow
ﬂ ies, and many others.
Order Trichoptera (tri-kop(cid:3)ter-a) (Gr. trichos, hair, (cid:1) pteron,
wing): caddisﬂ ies. Small, soft bodies; wings well veined and
partially scaled, hairy, folded rooﬂ ike over hairy body; chewing
mouthparts, mandibles much reduced; aquatic larvae of many
species construct cases of leaves, sand, gravel, bits of shell, or plant
matter, bound together with secreted silk or cement; some make
silk feeding nets attached to rocks in stream.
Order Siphonaptera (si-fon-ap(cid:3)ter-a) (Gr. siphon, a siphon,
(cid:1) apteros, wingless): ﬂ eas (Figure 21.13). Small; wingless; bodies
laterally compressed; legs adapted for leaping; ectoparasites or
micropredators of birds and mammals; larvae legless, maggotlike
scavengers.
Order Hymenoptera (hi-men-op(cid:3)ter-a) (Gr. hymen, membrane,
(cid:1) pteron, wing): ants, bees, wasps (Figure 21.41C). Very small
to large; membranous, narrow wings coupled distally; subordinate
hindwings; mouthparts for chewing and lapping liquids; ovipositor
sometimes modiﬁ ed into stinger, piercer, or saw (Figure 21.8); both
social and solitary species, most larvae legless, blind, and maggotlike.

Figure 21.41
A, Papilio krishna (order Lepidoptera) is a
beautiful swallowtail butterﬂ y from India.
Members of the Papilionidae grace many areas of
the world, both tropical and temperate, including
North America. Compare knobbed antennae with
plumed antennae in B, Rothschildia jacobaea, a
saturniid moth from Brazil. Hyalophora cecropia
is a common saturniid in North America. C, Paper
wasps (order Hymenoptera) attending their
pupae and larvae. D, Curculio proboscideus,
the chestnut weevil, is a member of the largest
family (Curculionidae) of the largest insect order
(Coleoptera). This family includes many serious
agricultural pests.

A

B

C

D

 A number of viruses and fungi that have potential as insec-
ticides have been isolated. Difﬁ culties and expense in rearing
these agents have been overcome in certain cases, and some are
now commercially produced.

 Introduction of natural predators or parasitoids of insect
pests has met with some success. In the United States vedalia
beetles from Australia help to control cottony-cushion scale on

citrus plants, and numerous instances of control by use of insect
parasitoids are recorded.

 Another approach to biological control is to interfere with
reproduction or behavior of insect pests with sterile males or
with naturally occurring organic compounds that act as hor-
mones or pheromones. Such research, although very prom-
ising, is slow because of our limited understanding of insect

hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   464
hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   464

7/23/07   6:34:57 PM
7/23/07   6:34:57 PM

w w w . m h h e . c o m / h i c k m a n i p z 1 4 e

CHAPTER 21  Hexapods

465

behavior and the problems of isolating and identifying complex
compounds that are produced in such minute amounts. Nev-
ertheless, pheromones will probably play an important role in
biological pest control in the future.

 A systems approach called  integrated pest management
is practiced with many crops. This approach involves mixing
all possible, practical techniques to contain pest infestations
at a tolerable level; for example, cultivating techniques (resis-
tant plant varieties, crop rotation, tillage techniques, timing of
sowing, planting or harvesting, and others), use of biological
controls, and sparse use of insecticides.

    The sterile-male approach has been used effectively in eradicating
screwworm ﬂ ies, a livestock pest. Large numbers of male insects, ster-
ilized by irradiation in the pupal stage, are introduced into the natural
population; females that mate with the sterile ﬂ ies lay infertile eggs.

     PHYLOGENY AND ADAPTIVE
DIVERSIFICATION
  Our understanding of evolutionary relationships among the
arthropod subphyla has changed greatly over the last decade.
Subphylum Uniramia, which united myriapods and hexapods,
was predicated on the assumption that uniramous appendages
were a shared derived character (synapomorphy) that united
these groups to the exclusion of all other arthropods. However,
Uniramia did not emerge as a monophyletic taxon in phylogenies
based on molecular characters, which grouped hexapods and
crustaceans as a clade. Crustaceans have biramous appendages,
so such a large difference in appendage form was initially con-
sidered strong evidence against the hypothesis of a sister-taxon
relationship of hexapods and crustaceans. However, once the
genetic basis of branched appendages was better understood, it
was clear that changes in the number of branches on an append-
age could evolve by a relatively simple change in gene expres-
sion. Members of former subphylum Uniramia were then divided
between subphylum Myriapoda and subphylum Hexapoda.

 Hexapods are now united with members of subphylum
Crustacea in clade Pancrustacea. Both taxa have mandibles, but
it is unclear whether pancrustaceans are more closely related to
myriapods, a mandibulate taxon, or to chelicerates, which lack
mandibles.

 While clade Pancrustacea is well supported, the nature of the
relationship between crustacean and hexapod subgroups is subject
to debate. Some phylogenies indicate a sister-taxon relationship
between crustaceans and hexapods, as we show in Figure 19.2, but
others indicate that hexapods arose  within  Crustacea. If this result
is supported by future studies, subphylum Crustacea will be para-
phyletic unless it is redeﬁ ned to include hexapods. In phylogenies
where hexapods originate within Crustacea, they appear closest
to branchiopod, cephaplocarid, and remipedian crustaceans. The
next decade of research should clarify the evolutionary position of
Hexapoda within Pancrustacea.

Thoracic
wings

Abdominal
gills

Thoracic
limbs

Abdominal
limbs

A

B

Figure 21.42
A, A Paleozoic “mayﬂ y” nymph with thoracic winglets and abdominal
gills. The thoracic winglets could have been precursors of wings.
B, A Paleozic insect with multiramous thoracic legs and vestigal,
multiramous abdominal limbs.

 Within Hexapoda, class Entognatha is shown as the sister
taxon to class Insecta in  Figure 21.1 , but some research indicates
that entognathous mouthparts may have evolved several times,
and that some entognathans may be closer to insects than they
are to other entognathans.

 Insect fossils, although not abundant, have been found in
numbers sufﬁ cient to give a general idea of the evolutionary his-
tory of the class. Although several groups of marine arthropods,
such as trilobites, crustaceans, and xiphosurans, were present in
the Cambrian period, the ﬁ rst terrestrial arthropods—scorpions
and millipedes—did not appear until the Silurian period. The ﬁ rst
insects, which were wingless, date from the Devonian period,
although a Silurian fossil has been tentatively identiﬁ ed as an
insect.

 It is likely that ancestral insects had a head and trunk of
many similar segments, most or all of which bore limbs. Early
fossil insects had small abdominal appendages (and apparently
some multiramous appendages,  Figure 21.42 ), and some mod-
ern, apterygote (primitively wingless) orders have abdominal
styli that are considered vestigial legs. We now understand that
absence of abdominal legs in most insects results from a pat-
tern of expression of certain  Hox  genes that prevents expres-
sion of the  Distal-less  gene in the abdomen of insects but not
crustaceans or onychophorans (p. 439).1    ,  2

  The evolutionary origin of insect wings has long been a puz-
zle. Recent evidence based on fossil insect mandibles suggests
that winged insects were in existence about 400 million years ago.
By the Carboniferous period, several orders of winged insects
(Paleoptera) most of which are now extinct, had appeared. The

1 Galant, R., and S. B. Carroll. 2002. Evolution of a transcriptional repression
domain in an insect Hox protein. Nature  415: 910–913.
2Ronshaugen, M., N. McGinnis, and W. McGinnis. 2002. Hox protein
mutation and macroevolution of the insect body plan. Nature  415: 914–917.

hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   465
hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   465

7/23/07   6:35:05 PM
7/23/07   6:35:05 PM

466

PART THREE  Diversity of Animal Life

adaptive value of wings for ﬂ ight is clear, but such structures did
not spring into existence fully developed. One hypothesis was
that wings developed from lateral thoracic expansions that were
useful in gliding. However, this hypothesis did not explain an
origin or function of articulations and neuromusculature in the
protowings that would provide raw material for selection and
eventual evolution of ﬂ apping wings to support ﬂ ight. An alter-
native hypothesis is that ancestral ﬂ ying insects were derived
from aquatic insects or insects with aquatic juveniles that bore
external gills on their thorax from which wings could have been
derived. Thoracic and abdominal gills on Paleozoic insects were
apparently articulated and movable, capable of ventilation and
swimming movements. They may have provided the morpholog-
ical structures for “prowings.” The evolution of broadly attached
thoracic prowings (incapable of providing ﬂ ight) in semi-aquatic
insects would have increased the body temperature of  basking
insects possessing them over “wingless” forms. The subsequent
expansion of these thoracic prowings for behavioral temperature
regulation (basking) could easily have provided the morpho-
logical stage required for the evolution of truly functional wings
( Figure 21.43 ) large enough to support ﬂ ight.

 The  ancestral  winged  insect  gave  rise  to  three  lines,
which differed in their ability to ﬂ ex their wings. Two of these
(Odonata and Ephemeroptera) have outspread wings or hold
their wings vertically over the abdomen. The other line has
wings that can fold back horizontally over the abdomen; it
branched into three groups, all of which were present by the
Permian period. One group with hemimetabolous metamor-
phosis, chewing mouthparts, and cerci includes Orthoptera,
Dermaptera,  Isoptera,  and  Embiidina;  another  group  with
hemimetabolous metamorphosis and a tendency toward suck-
ing mouthparts includes Thysanoptera, Hemiptera, and per-
haps also Psocoptera, Zoraptera, and Phthiraptera, although
there is some disagreement among authorities about the last
group. Insects with holometabolous metamorphosis have the
most specialized life history, and these apparently form a clade
that includes the remaining neopterous orders (for example,
Lepidoptera, Diptera, Hymenoptera).

   S U M M A R Y

Prothoracic
winglet

Functional
wings

Figure 21.43
An ancient paleopterous
insect, Homolaneura joannae,
from the Upper Carboniferous
illustrating two functional
pairs of wings as well as a pair
of prothoracic winglets. The
prothoracic winglets are broadly
attached and hinged like the
mesothoracic and metathoracic
wings of some recent insects.
Prior to the development of
fully functional wings, hinged
and mobile thoracic winglets on
all three thoracic segments may
have served a thermoregulatory
purpose that eventually allowed
the evolution of winglets large
enough to support ﬂ ight.

 Adaptive properties of insects have been stressed through-
out this chapter. The directions and ranges of their adaptive radi-
ation, both structurally and physiologically, have been amazingly
varied. Whether it be in the area of habitat, feeding adaptations,
means of locomotion, reproduction, or general mode of living,
the adaptive achievements of insects are truly remarkable.

 Members of subphylum Hexapoda have uniramous appendages
and bear one pair of antennae, a pair of mandibles, and two pairs
of maxillae on the head. Tagmata are head, thorax, and abdomen.
Hexapods have three pairs of jointed thoracic legs. There are two
classes: Entognatha and Insecta. Entognatha contains three orders of
tiny animals commonly inhabiting soils.

 Insecta is the largest class of the world’s largest phylum. Insects

have mouthparts whose bases extend out of the head capsule.

 The evolutionary success of insects in terrestrial habitats is
largely explained by features such as wings (present in most), water-
prooﬁ ng their cuticle and other mechanisms to minimize water loss,
and the ability to become dormant during adverse conditions.

 Most insects bear two pairs of wings on their thorax, although
some have one pair and some are primitively or secondarily wing-
less. Wing movements in some insects are controlled by direct

ﬂ ight muscles, which insert directly on the base of the wings in the
thorax, whereas others have indirect ﬂ ight muscles, which move
the wings by changing the shape of the thorax. Each contraction
of synchronous flight muscles requires a nerve impulse, while
asynchronous ﬂ ight muscles contract many times for each nerve
impulse.

 Feeding habits vary greatly among insects, and there is an enor-
mous variety of specialization of mouthparts reﬂ ecting the particular
feeding habits of a given insect. They breathe by means of a tracheal
system, which is a system of tubes that opens by spiracles on the
thorax and abdomen. Excretory organs are Malpighian tubules ﬂ oat-
ing freely in the hemocoel.

 Sexes are separate in insects, and fertilization is usually inter-
nal. Almost all insects undergo metamorphosis during development.
In hemimetabolous (incomplete) metamorphosis, larval instars are

hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   466
hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   466

7/23/07   6:35:06 PM
7/23/07   6:35:06 PM

w w w . m h h e . c o m / h i c k m a n i p z 1 4 e

CHAPTER 21  Hexapods

467

called immatures or nymphs, and adults emerge at the last nymphal
molt. In holometabolous (complete) metamorphosis, the last lar-
val molt gives rise to a nonfeeding stage (pupa). A winged adult
emerges at the ﬁ nal, pupal, molt. Both types of metamorphosis are
hormonally controlled.

 Insects are important to human welfare, particularly because
they pollinate food and forage crop plants, control populations of
other, harmful insects by predation and parasitism, and serve as
food for other animals. Many insects are harmful to human interests
because they inﬂ ict great damage on crops, food, forests, clothing,
and property, and many are carriers of important diseases affecting
humans and domestic animals.

 Hexapods are united with crustaceans in clade Pancrustacea.
Entognathans either form or include the sister taxon of insects.
They—like the basal insects—are wingless. Legs have been lost
from the abdomen of insects, being now conﬁ ned to each of the
three thoracic segments. Wings of ancestral winged insects may
have been derived from external gills of aquatic nymphs or adults,
and there may have been a stage in which tergal expansions (or
prowings), whether articulated or not, served to enhance the efﬁ -
ciency of behavioral thermoregulation until a size was reached to
form efﬁ cient aerofoils for truly functional wings.

 Adaptive  diversity  and  the  numbers  of  both  species  and

individuals in Insecta are enormous.

  R E V I E W   Q U E S T I O N S

1.

2.
3.

4.
5.

6.

7.

8.

9.
10.

11.

   What characteristics of hexapods distinguish them from  all
other arthropods?
  How are insects distinguished from other hexapods?
  Explain why indirect ﬂ ight muscles can beat much more
rapidly than direct ﬂ ight muscles.
  How do insects walk?
  What major parts form an insect’s gut, and how do these parts
function?
  Describe three different types of mouthparts found in insects,
and tell how they are adapted for feeding on different foods.
  Describe the tracheal system of a typical insect and explain
why it is able to function efﬁ ciently without oxygen-carrying
pigments in the hemolymph. Why would a tracheal system not
be suitable for humans?
  Describe the unique excretory system of insects. How is uric
acid formed?
  Describe sensory receptors that insects have to various stimuli.
  Explain the difference between holometabolous and
hemimetabolous metamorphosis in insects, including
stages of each.
  Describe hormonal control of metamorphosis in insects, including
the action of each hormone and where each is produced.

  S E L E C T E D   R E F E R E N C E S

 Arnett, R. H., Jr., and M. C. Thomas, eds. 2000. American beetles, vol. 1.

Boca Raton, Florida, CRC Press.

 Arnett, R. H., Jr., M. C. Thomas, P. E. Skelley, and J. H. Franks, eds.

2002. American beetles, vol. 2. Polyphaga: Scarabaeoidea through
Curculionoidea. Boca Raton, Florida, CRC Press.  These two volumes
present recent detailed keys to families of American beetles; the second
edition of volume 1 (2001) includes additions and corrections.
 Beckage, N. E. 1997. The parasitic wasp’s secret weapon. Sci. Am.

277: 82–87 (Nov.).  This parasitoid wasp carries a virus that invades the
host insect when the wasp lays its eggs, then paralyzes the host.
 Bennet-Clark, H. C. 1998. How cicadas make their noise. Sci. Am.
278: 58–61 (May).  Male cicadas are the loudest known insects.

 Berenbaum, M. R. 1995. Bugs in the system. Reading, Massachusetts,

Addison-Wesley Publishing Company.  How insects impact human
affairs. Well written for a wide audience, highly recommended.

 Downs, A. M. R., K. A. Stafford, and G. C. Coles. 1999. Head lice:

Prevalence in schoolchildren and insecticide resistance. Parasitol.
Today  15: 1–4.  This report is mainly concerned with England, but head
lice are one of the most common parasites of American schoolchildren.

12.
13.

14.

15.

16.

17.
18.

19.

20.

21.

  What is diapause, and what is its adaptive value?
  Brieﬂ y describe three features that insects have evolved to
avoid predation.
  Describe and give an example of each of four ways that
insects use to communicate with each other.
  What castes are found in honey bees and in termites, and
what is the function of each?
  What are mechanisms of caste determination in honey bees
and termites?
  What is trophallaxis? What function(s) does it serve in termites?
  Name several ways in which insects are beneﬁ cial to humans
and several ways they are detrimental.
  In what ways are detrimental insects controlled? What is
integrated pest management?
  What are the most probable characteristics of the most recent
common ancestor of insects? What major lineages descended
from it?
  What is a plausible scenario for evolution of wings and ﬂ ying
insects?

 Douglas, M. M. 1981. Thermoregulatory signiﬁ cance of thoracic lobes
in the evolution of insect wings. Science  211: 84–86.  Evolution of
broadly attached thoracic winglets could have increased the body
temperature excess of ancient wingless insects by 55% over that of forms
without winglets. Subsequent expansion of winglets for behavioral
thermoregulation could have provided the morphological stage required
for evolution of functional wings.

 Engel, M. S., and D. A. Grimaldi. 2004. New light shed on the oldest insect.
Nature  427 :627–630.  Silurian fossil mandibles indicate that insects and
entognathous hexapods had evolved by this period.

 Gullan, P. J., and P. S. Cranston. 2005. The insects: an outline of

entomology, ed. 3. Malden, Massachusetts, Blackwell Publishing.  An
easy-to-use text for general entomology with good ﬁ gures, modern
phylogenies, and data on biogeography .

 Hayashi, A. M. 1999. Attack of the ﬁ re ants. Sci. Am.  280: 26, 28 (Feb.).  Fire
ants have invaded Galápagos, Melanesia, and West Africa, where they
may be blinding elephants and otherwise disrupting the ecosystem.

 Heinrich, B., and H. Esch. 1994. Thermoregulation in bees. Am. Sci.

 82: 164–170.  Fascinating behavioral and physiological adaptations for

hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   467
hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   467

7/23/07   6:35:07 PM
7/23/07   6:35:07 PM

468

PART THREE  Diversity of Animal Life

increasing and decreasing body temperature allow bees to function in
a surprisingly wide range of environmental temperatures.

 Hölldobler, B. H., and E. O. Wilson. 1990. The ants. Cambridge,

Massachusetts, Harvard University Press.  The fascinating story of social
organization in ants.

 Hubbell, S. 1997. Trouble with honey bees. Nat. Hist.  106 (4):32–43.

 Infection of honey bees with  Varroa  mites is a big problem for
beekeepers.

 Johnson, N. F., and C. Triplehorn. 2005. Borror and DeLong’s introduction
to the study of insects, ed. 7. Belmont, California, Brooks/Cole
Publishing Company.  An up-to-date reference text for the study of
insects; keys are included, but some require specialized knowledge
of morphological characters. See Arnett and Thomas for keys to the
American beetle families .

 Kingsolver, J. G., and M. A. R. Koehl. 1985. Aerodynamics,

thermoregulation, and the evolution of insect wings: differential
scaling and evolutionary change. Evolution  39 (3):488–504.  This
work supports the thermoregulatory hypothesis proposed by Douglas
by showing that as winglets approach the maximum beneﬁ t for
temperature regulation they also reach the minimum size required for
either gliding and/or ﬂ apping ﬂ ight.

 Kukalova-Peck, J. 1978. Origin and evolution of insect wings and their

relation to metamorphosis, as documented by the fossil record.
Journal of Morphology  156: 53–126.  A thorough examination of
the paleontological evidence of the paleopterous insects and a re-
examination of the stages that may have led to the evolution of insect
wings and metamorphosis.

 Levine, M. 2002. How insects lose their limbs. Nature  415: 848–849.  A  Hox
 gene product in the abdomen of insects inhibits action of another gene
product that is necessary for limb formation.

  O N L I N E   L E A R N I N G   C E N T E R

  Visit  www.mhhe.com/hickmanipz14e  for chapter quizzing, key term
ﬂ ash cards, web links, and more!

 Raff, R. A. 1996. The shape of life: genes, development, and the evolution
of animal form. Chicago, University of Chicago Press.  Includes a good
account of how insect wings may have evolved.

 Regier, J. C., J. W. Shultz, and R. E. Kambic. 2005. Pancrustacean

phylogeny: hexapods are terrestrial crustaceans and maxillopods are
not monophyletic. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. B.  272 :395–401.  Hexapods
are closely related to Branchiopoda, Cephalocarida, and Remipedia.

 Tallamy, D. W. 1999. Child care among the insects. Sci. Am.  280: 72–77

(Jan.).  Most insects render no assistance to eggs or young, but females,
and in a few cases, males, of a variety of species, care for and protect
eggs and young.

 Topoff, H. 1990. Slave-making ants. Am. Sci.  78: 520–528.  An amazing type
of social parasitism in which certain species of ants raid the colonies of
related species, abduct their pupae, then exploit them to do all the work
in the host colony.

 Westneat, M. W., O. Betz, R. W. Blob, K. Fezzaa, W. J. Cooper, and W. Lee.
2003. Tracheal respiration in insects visualized with synchrotron X-ray
imaging. Science  299 :558–560.  Tracheae compress actively, exhaling
air, but expand passively.

 Whiting, R. 2004. Phylogenetic relationships and evolution of insects,

pp. 330–344. In J. Cracraft and M. J. Donoghue, eds., Assembling the
tree of life. New York, Oxford University Press.  A detailed discussion
of current hypotheses for insect evolution, including the suggestion
that entognathous hexapods do not form a monophyletic group, unlike
ectognathous forms .

hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   468
hic70049_ch21_441-468.indd   468

7/23/07   6:35:07 PM
7/23/07   6:35:07 PM

